The SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED HOUSE 
    has been one of the most popular housing types, although it has been adapted in urban areas to take the form of the row house that may share a all with an adjoining property. 
    Often, multistory residences in cities like New York and Chicago have one or more separate living units on each floor, offering the possibility of an owner-occupied building that also provided rental income.

The APARTMENT BUILDING 
    was teh response to housoing demand in crowded urban areas. 
    Modern highrise structures can offer residents many amenities. 
    In the suburbs, multifamily housing has taken advantage of greater availability of large tracts of affordable land. 
    An APARTMENT COMPLEX 
        is made up of a group of apartment buildings with a varying number of units in each building. 
        The buildings may be lowrise or highrise, and the complex may include storage areas, laundry and exercise facilities, parking, security, clubhouse, swimming pool, tennis court, and even a golf course.

The CONDOMINIUM
    A popular form of residential ownership, offering the security of owning property without the care and maintenance responsibilites a house demands.
    It is also a popular ownership or rental option in areas where property values make single-family building ownership inaccessible to many people.
    A condominium owner owns an individual unit and also shares ownership with other unit owners of common facilities (called common elements), such as halls, elevators, reception areak laundry room, exercise room, main entrance security system, and surrounding grounds, which may include a swimming pool, clubhouse, tennis court, or other amenities. 
    Management and maintenance of building exteriors and common facilities are provided by the governing association, typically making use of a management company and outsided contractors, with expenses paid out of montly assessments charged to owners.
    While condos are often apartment-style homes, this ownership form includes single-family and even commercial properties. 

A COOPERATIVE 
    also has units that share common walls and facilities within a larger building. 
    The owners do not own the units; instead, each owner owns shares in a corporation that holds title to the real estate. 
    Each shareholder receives a PROPRIETARY LEASE to a specified unit in the building. 
    Like condominium unit owners, cooperative shareholders pay their proportionate share of the building's expenses. 

PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUDs) 
    sometimes called master-planned communities, might consist entirely of residences, but they can also serve to merge such diverse land uses as housing, recreation, and commercial units into one self-contained development. 
    PUDs are planned under special zoning ordinances. 
    These ordinances often permit maximum use of open space by reducing lot sizes and street areas. 
    Owners do not have direct ownership interest in the common areas. 
    A community association is formed to maintain these areas, with fees for expenses collected from the owners. 
    A PUD may be a small development of just a few homes or an entire planned community. 

HIGHRISE DEVELOPMENTS or MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENTS(MUDs) 
    combine office space, stores, theaters, and apartment units into a single vertical community. 
    MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENTS are usually self-contained and may offer restaurants, grocery stores, beauty parlors, barbershops, and other attractive and convenient features. 

CONVERTED-USE PROPERTIES 
    are factories, warehouses, office buildings, hotels, schools, churches, and other structures that have been converted to residential use. Developers often find renovation of such properties more aesthetically and economically appealing than demolishing a perfectly sound structure to build something new. 
    An abandoned warehouse may be transformed into luxury loft condominium units; an out-of-date hotel may be renovated to create an apartment building; and an unused factory may be recycled into living and work spaces for artists. 

FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING or MOBILE HOME or MANUFACTURED HOMES 
    are permanent installations built to federal specifications, providing principal residences or vacation homes. 
    The relatively low production cost of assembly-line-type construction in factories unaffected by the elements, coupled with the increased living space available in newer models, makes such homes an attractive option for both manufacturers and buyers. 
    Increased sales have resulted in growing numbers of manufactured home parks that offer complete residential environments with permanent community facilities, as well as semi-permanent foundations and hookups for gas, water and electricity. 

    Another type of factory-built housing is the modular home with components that are assembled at a building site on a prepared foundation. Workers finish the structure and connect plumbing and wiring. 
    Entire developments can be built at a fraction of the time and cost of conventional stick-built at a fraction of the time and cost of conventional stick-built construction. 

FAIR HOUSING 
    The decision to purchase or lease housing, and where to do it, should be based on an individual's preferences and finances.  Too often, individuals have been denied the housing they prefer based on discriminating factors that should be considered. 
    Federal law prohibits discrimination in the provision of housing and housing-related services (including lending) based on an individual's race, color, national origin, religion, sex, familial status, or disability. 

