A listing agreement is an employment contract between a real estate broker and a property seller. In all states, an exclusive listing agreement must be in writing to be enforceable in court. The broker is a special agent of the seller.

As an agent, the broker is authorized to represent the principal and the principal's real estate to consumers. A real estate sales associate is a general agent of the broker and can carry out listing services only in the name of and under the supervision of the broker.

In an exclusive right-to-sell listing, one broker is appointed as the seller's sole agent, and if the property is sold while the listing is in effect, the broker is entitled to a commission, no matter who sells the property.

An exclusive agency listing authorizes one broker to act as the sole agent of the seller but allows the seller to retain the right to sell the property without obligation of payment to the broker.

In an open listing (also known as a nonexclusive listing), the seller retains the right to employ any number of brokers; the seller is obligated to pay a commission only to the broker who successfully produces a ready, willing, and able buyer; and the seller is not obligated to pay a commission if the seller personally sells the property without the aid of a broker.

A net listing in which the excess over the seller's desired net from the sale is paid to the broker as compensation may be prohibited by state law.

A multiple listing clause permits cooperation with other brokers in the multiple listing service (MLS).

An agreement to represent a seller may be terminated when

    the agreement's purpose is fulfilled,
    the agreement's term expires,
    the property is destroyed,
    title to the property is transferred by operation of law (e.g., bankruptcy),
    the broker and the seller mutually agree to end the agreement,
    either the broker or the seller breaches the contract, or
    either party dies or becomes incapacitated.

All exclusive listings should have a definite termination date and should not have an automatic extension provision.

The broker protection clause preserves a broker's right to compensation if, within a certain number of days after the listing agreement expires, the owner transfers the property to a purchaser who was brought to the seller by the listing broker.

The listing presentation is usually made by a sales associate of the broker and is the job interview with a prospective client—the property owner. The sales associate presents information about the firm, the market, and how the firm can provide the best service to the owner. The sales associate also makes a comparative market analysis (CMA) to help the seller have a realistic idea of the price range in which the subject property falls.

A listing agreement will identify the property owner(s) and the property, describe the property improvements, list any loans held by the owner and their current status, itemize loan and other payments on the property, and provide the details of a short sale, if the lender is willing to accept one.

Disclosures of agency relationships and property condition are important consumer safeguards and may be required by state law.

The listing agreement must specify any personal property that will be included in the sale of the real estate, as well as any fixtures or other items that will be excluded from the sale. Leased equipment also should be identified.

The seller may make a home warranty policy available for the buyer.

A buyer representation agreement is an employment contract in which a prospective property buyer employs a broker for the purpose of finding a suitable property. State law may specify the type of agreement that is available to the broker when representing a buyer. In an agency relationship, the broker will have a fiduciary responsibility to the buyer. In an exclusive buyer representation agreement, the buyer works with only one broker, but the broker is free to represent other buyer clients.

The buyer's broker will be compensated by a retainer, a flat fee for services, an hourly rate, a percentage of the purchase price, or some combination of these methods. The source of compensation does not determine the relationship of the parties and compensation is always negotiable.

Buyer representation is terminated when

    the agreement's purpose is fulfilled,
    the agreement's term expires,
    broker and buyer mutually agree to cancel the agreement,
    broker or buyer breaches the terms of the agreement, or
    broker or buyer dies or becomes incapacitated.