A freehold estate lasts for an indeterminable length of time. Fee simple is the highest estate recognized by law. Fee simple defeasible is an estate that is qualified because it is subject to the occurrence or nonoccurrence of a specified event. A life estate is based on the lifetime of the life tenant or someone else (pur autre vie).

An encumbrance is a claim, charge, or liability that attaches to real estate. A lien is a charge against property that provides security for a debt or obligation of the property owner. Covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) are private limitations on the use of land.

An easement is a right to use the land of another. An easement is usually created by written agreement between the parties. An easement appurtenant is said to run with the land when title is transferred. The dominant tenement benefits from the easement, which runs over the servient tenement.

An easement in gross is an individual or company interest in or right to use another's land. An easement by necessity arises when land has no access to a street or public way. An easement by prescription is acquired when a claimant has used another's land for the period required by law. The use must be continuous, nonexclusive, visible, open, and notorious.

An easement is terminated when the need for it no longer exists, when the owner of either the dominant or servient tenement becomes the owner of both, when the owner of a dominant tenement releases the right of easement to the owner of the servient tenement, if the easement is abandoned, or by the nonuse of a prescriptive easement.

A license is a personal privilege to enter the land of another for a specific purpose.

An encroachment occurs when all or part of a structure illegally intrudes on the land of another or beyond legal building lines.

A lis pendens gives notice of litigation in progress that may affect title to property.

Government powers can be recalled by using the acronym PETE. Police power is the state's authority, passed down to counties and municipalities through enabling acts, to legislate to preserve order, protect the public health and safety, and promote the general welfare of citizens. Eminent domain is the government's right to acquire privately owned real estate for a public or economically beneficial use through condemnation. Taxation can include a charge on real estate to raise funds to meet public needs. Escheat occurs when the state takes control of property after the owner dies leaving no will or lawful heirs.

When a taking of property occurs, the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution requires that the owner be given just compensation. A property owner may claim compensation under inverse condemnation if an adjacent public land use diminishes the value of the owner's property but the property has not been condemned for public use.
