Land 
    For the real estate professional, land is more than just a handful of dirt.  
    Land is defined as the earth's surface extending downward to the center of the earth and upward to infinity. 
    Land includes naturally attached objects, such as tress, as well as bodies of water found on or under it. 

        Land 
            Earth's surface to the center of the earth and teh airspace above the land, including the trees and water 
        
        Real Estate 
            Land plus permanent human-made additions 
        
        Real Property 
            Real estate plus bundle of legal rights 

    Land thus includes not only the surface of the earth, with the boulders and plants found on it, but also the underlying soil. It includes the subsurface, the minerals and substances that lie far below the earth's surface as well as the airspace, the air above the earth, all the way into space. 
    Of course, more than 70% of the surface of the earth is not land at all, but water. 
    Federal, state and local laws govern the ownership and use of those areas within and bordering the United States, including oceans, lakes, and rivers. 
    Private contracts, as well as laws and regulations, can also limit ownership and use rights in the surface, subsurface, and airspace of land. 

Phsical Characteristics of Land 
    Land has three physical characteristics: immobility, indestructibility, and uniqueness

Immobility 
    It is true that some of the substances of land are removable and that topography can be changed, but the geographic location of any given parcel of land can never be changed.  It is fixed and therefore immobile. 

Indestructibility 
    Land is considered indestructible, even though it is subject to both natural and human forces. 
    Land can be denuded of vegetation by strip mining, paved over for a highway or buidling, or eroded by a flood or dust storm.
    The geographic location will still remain, whatever its condition. 
    This permanence of land, coupled with the long-term nature of most improvements tends to stabilize investments in real property. 

    The fact that land is induestructible does not, however, change the fact that the improvements on land depreciate and can become obsolete, which may dramatically reduce the land's value. 
    This gradual depreciation should not be confused with the knowledge that the economic desirability of a given location can change. 

Uniqueness 
    Which is also known as nonhomogeneity, is the concept that no two parcels of property are exactly the same or in the same location.
    The characteristics of each property, no matter how small, differ from those of every other, and each property has its own geographic coordinates. 
    An individual parcel has no substitute because each is unique. 