Real Property 
    The interests, benefits, and rights that are automatically included in the ownership of real estate. (See Land, Real Estate, and Real Property.)
    In many states, the terms real estate and real property are synonymous, and are used to refer to both the physical property and the rights of ownership, while other states still make the distinction.

    Traditionally, ownership rights of real property are described as a bundle of legal rights. 
        These Rights Include 
            Right of Poessession 
            Right to control the property within the framework of the law. 
            Right of enjoyment (to use the property in any legal manner),
            Right of exclusion (to keep others from entering or using the property), and 
            Right of Disposition (to sell, will, transfer, or otherwise dispose of or encumber the property). 

    TItle to Real Property 
        The word TITLE, as it relates to real property (real estate), has two meaning: 
            (1) the right to or ownership of the property, including the owner's bundle of legal rights; and 
            (2) evidence of that ownership by a deed. 
        TITLE refers to ownership of the property, not to a printed document.
        The document by which the owner transfers title to the property is the deed. 

    The Bundle of Legal Rights 
        Real property is often coupled with the word APPURTENANCE. 
        An appurtenance (something that is transferred with or "runs with" the land) is a right or privilege associated with the property, although not necessarily a physical part of it.  
        Typical appurtenances include parking spaces in multiunit buildings, easements, water rights, and other improvements. 
        An appurtenance is connected to the property, and ownership of the appurtenance normally transfers to the new owner when the property is sold. 

    Real Estate includes the legal rights of ownership specified in the defintion of real property.
    Sometimes people use the term realty instead. 


Video Part 

Real estate is defined as the land plus appurtenances that are attached to the land. 
    Appurtenances include improvements, rights, interest, fixtures, and privileges. 
        Appurtenances are atteched to and transfer or run with the land. 

Real Estate is immovable. 
    When a property is sold, the land and all appurtenances automatically transfer to the new owner, via a deed. 

Land 
    Surface rights 
    Subsurface rights 
        water
        Minerals 
        Gas 
    Air rights 

Improvements 
    Items attached to the land with the intent of being permanent 
        Examples: house, fence, road, landscaping (such as roses, grapes, or other perennials) 

Rights of ownership 
    Possession 
    Use 
    Encumber 
    Dispose 
    Exclusion 
    Enjoyment 
    Give/Dedicate/Will 
    Mortgage 
    Control 
    License 

Rights 
    Three forms of rights 
        Land rights
            such as surface, air, water, and mineral rights
        Ownership rights
            the right of an owner to possess, transfer and control the property 
        Government right 
            Land use controls, taxation, eminent domain, and escheat 
        Surface Rights 
            Everyting on the surface 
        Air Rights 
            Rights extend as high as can be legally used 
            Gonverment controls air space above
        Water Rights 
            Right of water use 
                * Riparian 
                    Land abutting (Flowing water [R=river])
                * Littoral 
                    Land abutting (standing water [L=Lake])
            
        Ownership rights generally extend to the average high-water mark. 
        Water use rights do not automatically include the right of waterfront access to the water source. (Irrigation channels and ditches distribute water from the source.)

        An off-waterfront owner of a water right 
            (does not have the right to cross another's property to access the water source, but)
            could obtain the right of access from the waterfront owner via an EASEMENT 

        Accretion 
            Addition to land through natural causes 
        Erosion 
            gradual wearing away of the land by natural forces 
        Avulsion 
            Sudden loss of land by an act of nature 
        The property line is generally maintained even if the land is no longer there. 

    In states where water is scarce ownership and use of water are often determined by the doctrine of prior appropriation. 
        The right to use water is controlled by the state rather than by the landowner adjacent to the water. 

    A landowner must demonstrate to a state agency that the owner's plans are for beneficial use, such as crop irrigation. 
    The priority of water rights is usually determined by the oldest recorded permit date. 

    Mineral rights (subsurface right)
        Transferred when property is sold unless reserved by the seller
        May be leased or sold separately from the land 
        May be held by a third party 

    Real estate 
     transferred by a deed. 
    

