Constructive notice of a document is assumed when due diligence (such as a search of public records and inspection of the property) would reveal its existence. Actual notice means that an individual has direct knowledge of documents in the public records and facts revealed by an inspection of the property.

To serve as constructive notice, and provide priority over subsequent documents, a written document that affects an estate, right, title, or interest in land must be drafted and executed according to state law (recording acts) and must be recorded in the public records that are maintained by the designated official, such as the recorder of deeds, county clerk, or city clerk, in the county (or city) in which the property is located.

Public records are typically searched by title companies that provide title insurance to prospective purchasers based on what the search reveals.

Unrecorded documents that may affect title, such as a tax lien, may not be recorded immediately, yet are still given priority by law and require a search of tax records and other sources.

The chain of title is a record of property ownership, but it does not include liens and other encumbrances. A gap in the chain or other dispute of ownership creates a cloud on the title, which is resolved by a suit to quiet title.

An abstract of title, prepared by an abstractor or an attorney, is a summary report of what the title search reveals. It includes all recorded liens and encumbrances and lists records searched but does not indicate forgeries and interests that are unrecorded or could be discovered by property inspection.

A marketable title is one that a reasonably well-informed and prudent purchaser would accept because it does not have serious defects and does not rely on doubtful questions of law or fact to prove its validity, so that it does not expose the purchaser to litigation or threaten the purchaser's quiet enjoyment of the property.

Title insurance is issued as an owner's policy or mortgagee's policy and protects the insured from losses arising from defects in title and hidden defects, but it also identifies exclusions from coverage that typically include readily apparent title defects, zoning, and others.

The Torrens system provides a certificate of title issued by the county clerk that requires no further search to validate.

