Real estate agency relationships are governed by common law, which is established by tradition and court decisions, and statutory law, which is passed by state legislatures and other governing bodies.

An agent is hired by a principal to act on the principal's behalf. Agency is the fiduciary relationship in which the agent is held in a position of special trust and confidence by the principal. In a real estate transaction, the principal is the client. A customer is the nonrepresented party for whom some level of service is provided and who is entitled to fairness and honesty.

A subagent is authorized to work with the agent on behalf of the client. A nonagent (also known as a facilitator, intermediary, transaction broker, transaction coordinator, or contract broker) assists one or both parties with the transaction without representing either party's interests and often is subject to specific statutory responsibilities.

The relationship between principal and agent must be consensual. As express agency is based on an express agreement between agent and principal, while an implied agency will be created when the actions of the parties indicate that they have mutually consented to an agency. The source of the agent's compensation does not determine the agency, because the agent may be compensated by someone other than the client, or the agency may exist even if no compensation is involved—a gratuitous agency.

An agent has a fiduciary relationship of trust and confidence with the principal. The six common-law fiduciary duties can be remembered as COLD-AC, which is an acronym for the following:

    Care
    Obedience
    Loyalty
    Disclosure
    Accounting
    Confidentiality

A universal agent is empowered to do anything the principal could do personally.

A general agent represents the principal in a broad range of matters.

A special agent represents the principal in one specific act or business transaction only, under detailed instruction.

A single agency is one in which an agent represents only one party in a transaction. A real estate broker becomes an agent of the seller by entering into a listing agreement for the seller's property. A buyer's broker represents a buyer as an agent to find property that meets the buyer's specifications, as set out in the buyer representation agreement.

A dual agency is one in which an agent represents two principals in the same transaction. Dual agency, where allowed by state law, requires the informed consent of both principals. An undisclosed dual agency, which may occur inadvertently, can result in rescission of the sales contract, forfeiture of a commission, a lawsuit for damages, and possibly license suspension or revocation.

A designated agent (or designated representative) is a sales associate authorized by the broker to represent one party to a transaction, while a different sales associate in the same firm represents the other party to the transaction.

Termination of agency may be accomplished by the

    completion, performance, or fulfillment of purpose of agency;
    destruction or condemnation of the property;
    expiration of the terms of the agency;
    mutual agreement of all parties to the contract;
    breach by one of the parties, who may be liable for damages; or
    operation of law, as in the bankruptcy of the principal.

An agency coupled with an interest cannot be revoked by the principal or terminated upon the principal's death.

Statements to clients and customers should be clearly identified as opinion or fact. Puffing is legal exaggeration of a property's benefits, while fraud is the intentional misrepresentation of a material fact to harm or take advantage of another person.

A negligent misrepresentation occurs when a real estate professional should have known that a statement about a material fact was false and the real estate professional's misrepresentation was due to culpable (careless) negligence rather than simple (accidental) negligence.

The seller of residential property may have the duty to disclose any known latent (i.e., hidden) defects that threaten a building's structural soundness or an occupant's personal safety. In some states, an agent has an independent duty to conduct a reasonably competent and diligent inspection of the property and to disclose defects to prospective buyers. Disclosure of environmental hazards may be required.

Stigmatized properties may require an agent to consult an attorney. Megan's Law requires states to make available to the public information about how they can determine where persons convicted of sexual offenses live in the community.

