Methods of Describing Real Estate 
    There are three basic methods currently used to describe real estate:
        Metes and bounds
        Rectangular (or government) survey
        Lot and block (recorded plat)
    Although each method can be used independently, the methods may be combined in some situations. Some states use only one method; others use all three. About 10 states, including Hawaii and Colorado, have properties that are identified by means of a Torrens certificate, which is issued and guaranteed by the state. The Torrens system was created by Robert Torrens in Australia in 1858. Because of the expense involved in verifying a property description before issuing a certificate, the Torrens system was not widely adopted in this country, but it is still popular in Australia, New Zealand, and Canada.
    Today, technology allows for greater precision both in land measurement and recordkeeping. The use of a satellite-based geographic information system (GIS) to locate land boundaries and objects with amazing accuracy and the use of computer-assisted design (CAD) programs to create maps have created a new era in land description. The National Geospatial Advisory Committee,www.fgdc.gov/ngac, was created in 1994 to coordinate geographic data acquisition and access. The Federal Bureau of Land Management and the USDA Forest Service were charged in 1998 with the task of developing the National Integrated Land System (NILS) in cooperation with states, counties, and private industry. Recognizing the need for consistent standards of data collection and use, the Cadastral Data Content Standard was created by the Federal Geographic Data Committee, www.fgdc.gov, to integrate information found in publicly available land records. The NILS is being designed to be compatible with land descriptions utilizing both the metes-and-bounds method and the rectangular survey system.

    Metes-and-bounds method 
        The metes-and-bounds method of land description is the oldest found in the United States, and it was used in the original 13 colonies, as well as in those states that were being settled while the rectangular survey system was being developed. Metes means to measure, and bounds means linear directions. The method relies on a property's physical features to determine the boundaries and measurements of the parcel. A metes-and-bounds description starts at a designated place on the parcel, called the point of beginning (POB). The POB is also the point at which the description ends. From there, the surveyor proceeds around the property's boundaries. The boundaries are recorded by referring to linear measurements, natural and artificial landmarks (called monuments), and directions. A metes-and-bounds description always ends back at the POB so that the tract being described is completely enclosed.

    Monuments 
        Monuments are fixed objects used to identify the POB, all corners of the parcel or ends of boundary segments, and the location of intersecting boundaries. In colonial times, a monument might have been a natural object such as a stone, a large tree, a lake, or a stream. It also may have been a street, a fence, or other marker. Today, monuments are iron pins or concrete posts placed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, other government departments, or trained private surveyors. Measurements often include the words more or less because the location of the monuments is more important than the distances between them. The actual distance between monuments takes precedence over any linear measurements in the description. Because monuments can be moved, surveyors give their final metes-and-bounds reference in terms of cardinal points and distance. They include the statement "to the point of beginning (POB)" to ensure closure and to remove questions if an error in footage prevents closure.

    Metes-and-bounds descriptions are complicated. They can be difficult to understand when they include detailed compass directions or concave and convex lines. Sometimes the lines are curved on an arc or radius that becomes part of the description. Natural deterioration or destruction of the monuments in a description can make boundaries difficult to identify.
    Technological advances, such as the use of computers, lasers, satellites, and global positioning systems, have meant a resurgence in property descriptions using points of reference or metes-and-bounds descriptions.

    Rectangular (government) survey system 
        The rectangular survey system, sometimes called the government survey system, was established by Congress in 1785 to standardize the description of land acquired by the newly formed federal government. By dividing the land into rectangles, the survey provided land descriptions by describing the rectangle(s) in which the land was located. The system is based on two sets of intersecting lines: principal meridians and base lines. The principal meridians run north and south, and the base lines run east and west. Both are located by reference to degrees of longitude and latitude. Each principal meridian has a name or number and is crossed by a base line. Each principal meridian and its corresponding base line are used to survey a definite area of land, indicated on the map by boundary lines. There are 37 principal meridians in the United States and each is referenced by a name or meridian number.
        Each principal meridian describes only specific areas of land by boundaries. No parcel of land is described by reference to more than one principal meridian. The meridian used may not necessarily be the nearest one.  Map of United States Showing Meridians and Base Lines shows which states use which systems and also shows principal meridians and base lines.

    Tiers or Township Lines 
        Lines running east and west, parallel to the base line and six miles apart, are called township lines. (See  Township Lines.) They form strips of land called tiers. Think of these tiers as being like the tiers of a wedding cake. The tiers are designated by consecutive numbers north or south of the base line.

    Ranges or Range Lines 
        The land on either side of a principal meridian is divided into six-mile-wide strips by lines that run north and south, parallel to the meridian. These north-south strips of land are called ranges. (See  Range Lines.) They are designated by consecutive numbers east or west of the principal meridian. For example, Range 3 East would be a strip of land between 12 and 18 miles east of its principal meridian.

    Townships 
        When the horizontal township lines and the vertical range lines intersect, they form squares, or townships, that are the basic units of the rectangular survey system. (See  Townships in the Rectangular Survey System.) A township is 6 miles square and contains 36 square miles (23,040 acres).
        The directions of township and range lines, and tiers and ranges, may be easily remembered by thinking of the words this way:
        Each township is given a legal description. A township's description includes the
            designation of the tier in which the township is located,
            designation of the range, and
            name or number of the principal meridian for that area.

    Townships in the Rectangular Survey System 

    Sections 
        Townships are subdivided into sections and subsections called halves and quarters, which can be further divided. Each township contains 36 sections. Each section is one square mile or 640 acres, with 43,560 square feet in each acre. Sections are numbered 1 through 36, as shown in  Sections in a Township. Section 1 is always in the northeast, or upper right-hand, corner. The numbering proceeds right to left to the upper left-hand corner. From there, the numbers drop down to the next tier and continue from left to right, then back from right to left. By law, each Section 16 was set aside for school purposes, and the sale or rental proceeds from this land were originally available for township school use. The schoolhouse was usually located in this section so it would be centrally located for all the students in the township. As a result, Section 16 is commonly called a school section.

    Sections in a Township 
        Sections are divided into halves (320 acres) and quarters (160 acres)

    Reading a rectangular survey description 
        Legal descriptions should always include the name of the county and the state in which the land is located because meridians often relate to more than one state and occasionally relate to two base lines. For example, the description "the southwest quarter of Section 10, Township 4 North, Range 1 West of the Fourth Principal Meridian" could refer to land in either Illinois or Wisconsin.
        Land in states that use the rectangular survey system may also require a metes-and-bounds description. This usually occurs in one of three situations: (1) when describing an irregular tract; (2) when a tract is too small to be described by quarter-sections; or (3) when a tract does not follow the lot or block lines of a recorded subdivision or section, quarter-section lines, or other fractional section lines.

    Metes-and-bounds descriptions within the rectangular survey system 
        Land in states that use the rectangular survey system may also require a metes-and-bounds description. This usually occurs in one of three situations: (1) when describing an irregular tract; (2) when a tract is too small to be described by quarter-sections; or (3) when a tract does not follow the lot or block lines of a recorded subdivision or section, quarter-section lines, or other fractional section lines.

    Lot-and-block method 
        The third type of legal description is the lot-and-block (recorded plat) method. This system uses lot and block numbers referred to in a plat map filed in the public records of the county where the land is located. The plat map is a map of a town, a section, or a subdivision, indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties. The lot-and-block method is used mostly in subdivisions and urban areas.
        A lot-and-block survey is performed in two steps. First, a large parcel of land is described either by the metes-and-bounds method or by a rectangular survey. Once this large parcel is surveyed, it is broken into smaller parcels. As a result, a lot-and-block description always refers to a prior metes-and-bounds or rectangular survey description. For each parcel described under the lot-and-block system, the lot refers to the numerical designation of any particular parcel. The block refers to the name of the subdivision under which the map is recorded. The block reference is drawn from the early 1900s, when a city block was the most common type of subdivided property.
        The lot-and-block system starts with the preparation of a subdivision plat by a licensed surveyor or engineer. (See  Subdivision Plat Map of Block A.) On this plat, the land is divided into numbered or lettered lots and blocks, and streets or access roads for public use are indicated. Lot sizes and street details must be described completely and must comply with all local ordinances and requirements. When properly signed and approved, the subdivision plat is recorded in the county in which the land is located. The plat becomes part of the legal description. In describing a lot from a recorded subdivision plat, three identifiers are used:
            Lot and block number
            Name or number of the subdivision plat
            Name of the county and state
        Some lot-and-block descriptions are not dependent on the government survey system and may refer simply to the plat recorded in the land records of the county.

The Survey: Measuring Property Rights 
    Legal descriptions should not be altered or combined without adequate information from a surveyor or title attorney. A licensed surveyor is trained and authorized to locate and determine the legal description of any parcel of land. The surveyor does this by preparing two documents: a survey and a survey sketch. The survey states the property's legal description. The survey sketch shows the location and dimensions of the parcel. When a survey also shows the location, size, and shape of buildings on the lot, it is referred to as a spot survey.
    Legal descriptions should be copied with extreme care. An incorrectly worded legal description in a sales contract may result in a conveyance of more or less land than the parties intended. For example, damages suffered from an incorrect description could be extensive if buildings and improvements need to be moved because the land upon which the improvements were made is not owned. Often, even punctuation is extremely critical. Title problems can arise for the buyer who seeks to convey the property at a future date. Even if the contract can be corrected before the sale is closed, the real estate professional risks losing a commission and may be held liable for damages suffered by an injured party because of an improperly worded legal description.
    Real estate professionals should be aware of the types of surveys and their uses recognized by state law or local custom. Not all surveys include surveyor liability and warranties of accuracy. An improvement location certificate (ILC), for instance, may be sufficient for some purposes but is not a full survey. It is prepared in a shorter time frame and at less cost, and provides the location of structures and improvements, easements, and any encroachments in relation to property boundaries.
    The National Society of Professional Surveyors provides useful information for real estate professionals and consumers at www.nsps.us.com, including links to state associations and other affiliated organizations.
        In Practice
            Because legal descriptions, once recorded, affect ownership of real estate, they should be prepared only by a professional surveyor. Real estate professionals who copy legal descriptions create potential risks for themselves and their clients and customers. The better practice is to refer to a reliable document, such as the deed that transferred the property to the current owner, for a full and accurate legal description.

    Measuring Elevations 
        Just as surface rights must be identified, surveyed, and described, so must rights to the property above the earth's surface. Recall that land includes the space above the ground. In the same way that land may be measured and divided into parcels, the air may be divided. The owner may subdivide the air space above the land into air lots. Air lots are composed of the airspace within specific boundaries located over a parcel of land.
        The condominium laws passed in all states require that a registered land surveyor prepare a plat map that shows the elevations of floor and ceiling surfaces and the vertical boundaries of each unit with reference to an official datum (discussed in the next section). A unit's floor, for instance, might be 60 feet above the datum and its ceiling, 69 feet. Typically, a separate plat is prepared for each floor in the condominium building.
        The following is an example of the legal description of a condominium apartment unit that includes a fractional share of the common elements of the building and land:
            UNIT _____, Level ___, as delineated on survey of the following described parcel of real estate (hereinafter referred to as Development Parcel): The north 99 feet of the west ½ of Block 4 (except that part, if any, taken and used for street), in Sutton's Division Number 5 in the east ½ of the southeast ¼ of Section 24, Township 3 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, in Denver County, Colorado, which survey is attached as Exhibit A to Declaration made by Colorado National Bank as Trustee under Trust No. 1250, recorded in the Recorder's Office of Denver County, Colorado, as Document No. 475637; together with an undivided _____% interest in said Development Parcel (excepting from said Development Parcel all the property and space comprising all the units thereof as defined and set forth in said Declaration and Survey).
        Subsurface rights can be legally described in the same manner as air rights, but they are measured below the datum rather than above it. Subsurface rights are used not only for coal mining, petroleum drilling, and utility line location but also for multistory condominiums—both residential and commercial—that have several floors below ground level.

    Datum 
        A datum is a point, line, or surface from which elevations are measured or indicated. For the purpose of the United States Geological Survey (USGS), datum is defined as the mean sea level at New York Harbor. But virtually all large cities have local official datum that is used instead of the USGS datum. A surveyor would use a datum in determining the height of a structure or establishing the grade of a street. USGS has information on a variety of climate, land use, and environmental issues, as well as a state site locator, www.usgs.gov.

    Monuments 
        Monuments are traditionally used to mark surface measurements between points. A monument could be a marker set in concrete, a piece of steel-reinforcing bar (rebar), a metal pipe driven into the soil, or simply a wooden stake stuck in the dirt. Because such items are subject to the whims of nature and vandals, their accuracy is sometimes suspect. As a result, surveyors rely most heavily on benchmarks to mark their work accurately and permanently.
        Benchmarks are monuments that have been established as permanent reference points throughout the United States. They are usually embossed brass markers set into solid concrete or asphalt bases. While used to some degree for surface measurements, their principal reference use is for marking datums.
            In Practice
                All large cities have established a local official datum used in place of the USGS datum. For instance, the official datum for Chicago is known as the Chicago City Datum. It is a horizontal plane that corresponds to the low-water level of Lake Michigan in 1847 (the year in which the datum was established) and is considered to be at zero elevation. Although a surveyor's measurement of elevation based on the USGS datum will differ from one computed according to a local datum, it can be translated to an elevation based on the USGS.
















