Brokerage
    Brokerage is the business of brining people together in a real estate transaction. 
    A licensed real estate broker acts as a point of contact between two or more poeple in negotiating the sale, purchase, or rental or property. 
    A broker is defined as "a person or company licensed to buy, sell, exchange, or lease real property for others and to charge a fee for these services.
        A licensed real estate salesperson is employed by or associated with the broker to perform brokerage activites on behalf of or for the broker, and may also be referred to as a sales associate or associate licensee.

    A real estate licensee is a person who has satisfied the requirements of a licensing agency, as authorized by state legislation.  
    The requirements typcially include course hours or work experience and passing a state-mandated real estate exam.  
    In some states, every real estate licensee is a broker, but only a managing broker may employ other licensees to act as sales associates, and the managing broker is responsible for the sales assoicates' conduct.  
    Check the laws in your state to learn the terms used for licensees and the requirements for obtaining a license.


Appraisal
    Appraisal is the process of developing an opinion of a property's market value, based on established methods and the appraiser's professional judgment.  
    Although brokers should have some understanding of the valuation process and, in some circumstances, may even be asked to estimate the price at which a property is likely to sell, lenders require a professional appraisal for most transcations.
    Appraisers must have detailed knowledge of the methods of valuation. 
    Appraisers must be not only licensed or certified for many federally related transcations but also licensed or certified in many states to be involved in transactions that are not federally related.
    The appraisal Institute, www.appraisalinstitute.org is the largest trade assocation of real estate appraisers.

Property management
    A property manager is a person or company hired to maintain and manage property on behalf of the property owner.
    By hiring a property manager, the owner is relieved of day-to-day management tasks, such as finding new tenants, collecting rents, finishing or altering space for tenants, ordering repairs, and generally maintaining the property.
    The scope of the manager's work depends on the terms of the management agreement--The employment contract between the owner and the manager is to protect the owner's investment and maximize the return on that investment.  Depending on the size of the property and/or the scope of the work required, the property manager may need a real estate license or a property management license that is issued by the state in which the property is located.
    The Building Owners and Managers Association International, www.boma.org provides useful resources for both owners and managers.

Financing
    Financing is the business of providing the funds that make real estate sales transcations possible. Most sales are financed by a loan that is secured by a mortgage or deed of trust on the property purchased. 
    Individuals involved in financing real estate may work in commerical banks, thrifts (which include savings associations), and credit unions, as well as mortgage banking and mortgage brokerage companies.
    Federal law requires mortgage loan originators to qualify for the Nationwide Multistate Licensing System and registry (NMLS), found at https://nationwidelicensingsystem.org

Subdivision and Development
    Subdivision is the dividing of a single property into smaller parcels.
    Development involves preparation of a site and construction of structures or other improvements.
    These improvements may be either on-site or off-site.  Off-site improvements, such as water lines and storm sewers, are made on public lands to serve the new development.
    On-site improvements, such as new homes or recreational amenities, are made on individual parcels.
    While subdivision and development normally are related, they are independent processes that can occur separately.

Home inspection
    Home inspection is a profession that combines a practitioner's interest in real estate with skills and training in the construction trades.
    Many states have recognized the importance of a thorough home inspection by a competent, well-trained inspector by instituting home inspector licensing requirements that include education, training, examinations, and ongoing coursework.
    The american society for Home inspectors, www.homeinspector.org is a trade group for home inspection professionals.

    A professional home inspector conducts a thorough visual survey of a property's structure, systems, and site conditions and prepares an analytical report that is valuable to both purchasers and homeowners.
    The inspector examines the property from the chimney to the basement, being alert to deterioration, water intrusion, mechanical, or other observable problems.
    Often, the home inspection leads to a recommendation for additional examination when warranted by a property condition, such as evidence of mold damage or insect infestation.
    Cautious consumers, especially those who live in states in which caveat emptor (buyer beware) is the law, are relying more and more on the inspector's report to help them make purchase decisions.
    Frequently, a real estate sales contract will be contingent (conditioned) upon the inspector's report.

Counseling
    Counseling involves providing clients with competent independent advice based on sound professional judgment. A real estate counselor helps clients choose among the various alternatives involved in purchasing, leasing, using, or investing in property. 
    A counselor's role is to furnish clients with the information needed to make informed decisions.
    Professional real estate counselors must have a high degree of industry expertise.

Education 
    Real estate education is available to both practitioners and consumers. 
    Colleges and universities, private schools, and trade organizations all conduct real estate courses and seminars covering topics from the principles of a prelicensing program to the technical aspects of taax and exchange law. 
    State licensing laws establish the minimum educational requirements for obtaining--and keeping--a real estate license. 
    Continuing education, usually required for license renewal, helps ensure that licensees keep their skills and knowledge current.

Other areas 
    Many other professionals are involved in real estate, including lawyers who specialize in this area or practice, land-use planners employed by state and local agencies, and tax assessors.

