Housing Affordability 

    Principal, Intererst, Taxes, Insurance 
        PITI 
            Speak to the lender ()

    Consider montly budget 
        Utilites, Trash removal, rountine maintence, repairs 

    Credit Score 
        Any debts will effect the amount you qualify for. 

    Debt-to-income radio 
        Debts(bills) vs income 
    Housing Expense Ratio 
        PITI vs Income 

    Other Expenses to Consider 
        Trash 
        Water
        sewer
        HOA fee 
        Deferred Maintenance 

    Helping your clients understand the real costs of owning a home builds trust. 


Security Instrument 
    Financing Documents 

        Title theory vs lien theory 
            1 In title theory states, the vorrower (mortgagor) grants legal title to a trustee. 
                a.) Trustee holds title on behalf of the lender 
                b.) The borrower retains equitable title. 
                c.) Legal title is returned to the borrower when the debt is paid in full. 

            2 In lien theory states, the borrower holds both legal and equitable title. 
                a.) The lender has a specific lien on the property as security for the mortgage debt. 
                
                // this shit down here important // 
            3 Whether a mortgage or deed of trust is used, the function is the same:
                a.) Security for the promissory note, pledging the real estate property as collateral for the debt. 
                        <!-- nah like bruh really want me to remember this shit-->
            4 States using deeds of trust often use nonjudicial foreclosure (also konwn as power of sale); those using mortgages use either nonjudicial or a judicial foreclosure process. 

        Promissory note 
            Promissory note is a legal instrument that provides evidence of the debt 
                A) Secured by the mortgage or deed of trust 

            2 Held by the lender until loan is fully repaid; not recorded 
            3 Key elements 
                a Personal promise of borrower to repay a fixed amount 
                b Terms of repayment 
                c Signature of borrower; lender does not sign 
            4 Special Provisions 
                a) Acceleration clause 
                    1 if borrower defaults, lender can demand immediate payment of entire balance. 
                b) Promissory note alone does not create a lien on the property. 
                C) MOst real estate notes are negotiable and transferable, which allows them to be sold. 

        MOrtgage or Deed of trust 
            1) Instruments that pledge (hypothecate)
                Property as security for a debt 
            2) Mortgage or deed of trust creates a lien when recorded 
                A.) Creates payment obligation to pay off principal and interest 
                B) Interest on the majority of home loans is simple, not compounded. 
            3) Allows for foreclosure if borrower defaults on the note 
            4) Mortgage: Two-Party instrument 
                A) Borrower is the mortgagor who gives a mortgage to the lender 
                B) Lender is the mortgagee  
            5) Deeed of Trust: Three-party instrument 
                A) Borrower is the trustor 
                B) Lender is the beneficiary (benefits from the trust). 
                C) Trustee -- in some states, a public official 
            6) Like all contracts, a mortgage requires the essential elements and must be in writing and signed to be valid. 
        Provisions of a mortgage/deed of trust 
            1) Defines the rights and obligations 
            2) Acceleration caluse --lender may demand full payment in case of default. 
            3) Defeasance clause -- when debt is paid (mortgage/deed of trust), lien must be removed. 
                A) Mortgagee provides "Satisfaction."
                B) Trustee provides deed of reconveyance 
                C) Satisfaction or reconveyance deed proves payments are in full and are recorded by borrower 
            4) Due-on-sale clause Also called alienation clause 
                A)Provides that when the property is sold, the lender may demand immediate payment of the outstanding debt 
                B) Lender consent is required for assumption of a loan.
            5 Prepayment clause establishes terms and conditions for early loan payoff 
                A) May include penalties for early payoff (prepayment penalty)
            6) Power of sale clause --optional provision in mortgage if allowed by state law; standard in deeds of trust 
                a) Gives the trustee/mortgagee the power to foreclose without going to court(nonjudicial)
        Reasons for loan acceleration and foreclosure 
            1) Nonpayment of principal and interest 
            2) Nonpayment of taxes 
            3) Removal of improvements wihtou lender's permission 
            4) Let insurance coverage lapse 
            5) Waste would include deferred maintenance that lowers value below what is owed 
            6) Alienation without consent (if there is a due-on-sale clause)









