Introduction to the real estate financing market

      The real estate financing market has the following three basic components:

      Government influences, primarily the Federal Reserve System
            The primary mortgage market
            The secondary mortgage market

    The Federal Reserve System

        The role of the Federal Reserve System (the Fed), acting through its Board of Governors, is to maintain sound credit conditions, help counteract inflationary and deflationary trends, and create a favorable economic climate. The Federal Reserve System divides the country into 12 federal reserve districts, each served by a federal reserve bank. All nationally chartered banks must join the Fed and purchase stock in its district reserve banks. Qualified state chartered banks may also join the Fed.
                The Fed regulates the flow of money and interest rates in the marketplace through its member banks (and other depository institutions) by controlling the rate charged for loans it makes to them, called the discount rate, as well their reserve requirements—the minimum level of funds that an institution must maintain. The discount rate charged by the Fed influences the prime rate (also called the base rate) that member institutions charge for credit card loans, small business loans, and other forms of financing.

        When the discount rate rises, interest rates on all sorts of loans will rise, making funding harder to obtain. When the discount rate is lowered, interest rates will go down, making borrowed funds easier to obtain, an incentive to businesses as well as homebuyers. The Fed's reserve requirements place funds out of circulation; when reserve requirements are increased, lender solvency is improved but funding is harder to obtain.

        The Fed acts on the open market to stimulate the economy at a time of recession by increasing the amount of money in circulation by buying Treasury securities. The Fed can also act to control inflation by decreasing the amount of money in circulation by selling Treasury securities.


    The primary mortgage market
        The primary mortgage market is made up of the lenders that originate mortgage loans. These lenders make money available directly to borrowers. From a borrower's point of view, a loan is a means of financing an expenditure; from a lender's point of view, a loan is an investment. All investors look for profitable returns on their investments. Income on a loan is realized from the following two sources:

                Finance charges collected at closing, such as loan origination fees and discount points
        Recurring income, the interest collected during the term of the loan

        Lenders can sell mortgage loans, which produces income to make more loans, and some lenders derive income from servicing loans for investors who have purchased the loans, or servicing loans made by other mortgage lenders. Servicing a loan involves

                collecting payments (including taxes and insurance, if the borrower must maintain an impound account as part of the loan agreement),
                accounting,
                bookkeeping,
                preparing insurance and tax records,
                processing payments of taxes and insurance, and
                following up on loan payment and delinquency.

        They are not mortgage brokers.
                Mortgage brokers. Mortgage brokers are not lenders, but they are mentioned here because they are intermediaries who bring borrowers and lenders together. Mortgage brokers locate potential borrowers, process preliminary loan applications, and submit the applications to lenders for final approval. They do not service loans once the loans are made. Mortgage brokers also may be real estate brokers who offer these financing services in addition to their regular real estate brokerage activities.

                The Secure and Fair Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (SAFE Act) requires states to license mortgage loan originators according to national standards and also requires all state agencies to participate in the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry (NMLS), www.nmlsconsumeraccess.org, as of January 1, 2011. The NMLS Resource Center is at https://nationwidelicensingsystem.org/Pages/default.aspx.

                All mortgage loan originators (MLOs) must register annually and meet other requirements. NMLS is the sole system of licensure for mortgage companies for 57 state agencies and the sole system of licensure for MLOs for 59 state and territorial agencies.

        In Practice

                A growing number of consumers apply for mortgage loans via the internet, particularly for a loan refinancing. Many major lenders have websites that offer information to potential borrowers regarding their current loan programs and requirements. In addition, online brokerages link lenders with potential borrowers. The best sites allow comparison of loan terms across a variety of loan programs. New borrowers are cautioned to make sure that there is the opportunity for a phone or in-person consultation before making any mortgage decision.

        The Secondary Mortgage Market
                In addition to the primary mortgage market, where loans are originated, there is a secondary mortgage market in which loans are bought and sold only after they have been funded (closed). The secondary mortgage market thus helps lenders raise capital to make additional mortgage loans and is especially useful when money is in short supply. By freeing capital for additional loans, the secondary market stimulates both the housing construction market and the mortgage market. The lender benefits, not only by raising additional capital, but also by avoiding interest rate risks on adjustable rate loans when interest rates fall, as well as on fixed rate loans if interest rates rise, and by making a profit on the sale. In addition, the lender may continue to service the loan and collect a fee for that service.

                In the secondary market, a number of mortgage loans are assembled into blocks called pools. The mortgages can be pooled by the lender who sells them or, more frequently, by the organization that purchases them. Securities that represent shares in these pooled mortgages are then sold to investors or other organizations. The key players in the secondary mortgage market were created by the federal government in the decades following the Great Depression and World war II to help increase loan opportunities for homebuyers. They are referred to collectively as government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs). (See  Government-Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs).)

        Fannie Mae
                Originally the Federal National Mortgage Association, Fannie Mae was created as a government agency in 1938. It became a completely private shareholder-owned corporation in 1968, although it is still under congressional supervision. Fannie Mae buys from a lender a block or pool of mortgages that may then be used as collateral for mortgage-backed securities that are sold on the global market.

                The housing collapse that was felt around the country starting in 2006 brought into question the value a great many of the mortgages that Fannie Mae had purchased and resold to investors. In September 2008, Fannie Mae was placed into the conservatorship of the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), www.fhfa.gov. Fannie Mae continues to operate and provide a secondary market for mortgage loans, although with massive federal investment to protect its investors. Fannie Mae deals in conventional as well as FHA-insured and VA-guaranteed loans.

                One of the most important features of the GSEs has been their development of standardized loan application, credit report, appraisal and other forms that are required for loans they purchase, as well as detailed guidelines for the lending process. Fannie Mae has a consumer-oriented site at www.fanniemae.com, and a site for lenders that provides access to its forms and guides at www.fanniemae.com/singlefamily.

    Freddie Mac
        Originally called the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, Freddie Mac was created in 1970 as a privately owned corporation but is also now under government conservatorship. Freddie Mac continues to provide a secondary market for mortgage loans, primarily conventional loans.

        Many lenders use the standardized forms and follow the guidelines issued by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

    Farmer Mac
        The Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation (Farmer Mac) is privately owned and publicly traded, and was established by Congress in 1988 to create a secondary market for agricultural mortgage and rural utilities loans and the portions of agricultural and rural development loans guaranteed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Farmer Mac is part of the Farm Credit System and is regulated by the Farm Credit Administration. Farmer Mac guarantees payment of principal and interest on the loans it purchases and pools those loans for sale. Farmer Mac has not had the financial difficulties that have plagued Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in recent years, primarily because market values in rural areas have not gone through the wide swings that most urban areas have experienced. Information on Farmer Mac is at www.farmermac.com; Farmer Mac has a subsidiary, Farmer Mac II, LLC, found at www.farmermac2.com.

    Ginnie Mae
        The Government National Mortgage Association, Ginnie Mae, was created in 1968 and has always been a governmental agency. Information on this agency can be found at www.ginniemae.gov. Ginnie Mae is a division of the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), organized as a corporation without capital stock. Ginnie Mae does not buy or sell loans or issue mortgage-backed securities. Instead, Ginnie Mae administers special-assistance programs and guarantees investment securities issued by private offerors (such as banks, mortgage companies, and savings and loan associations) and backed by pools of FHA-insured and VA-guaranteed mortgage loans. The Ginnie Mae pass-through certificate is a security interest in a pool of mortgages that provides for a monthly pass-through of principal and interest payments directly to the certificate holder. Such certificates are guaranteed by Ginnie Mae.

    Government-Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs)
        Fannie Mae
            Conventional, FHA-insured, VA-guaranteed loans
        Freddie Mac
            Mostly conventional loans
        Ginnie Mae

Loan Programs 
    Mortgage loans can be classified based on their loan-to-value ratio (LTV). The LTV is the ratio of debt to the value of the property, where the value is the sales price or appraised value, whichever is less. The lower the ratio of debt to value, the higher the down payment by the borrower. For the lender, the higher down payment means a more secure loan, which minimizes the lender's risk.
        In Practice
            If the appraised value of a property is less than the sales price, the buyer/borrower will renegotiate the contract with the seller so that the sales price is reduced to the appraised value, or the buyer will make an additional down payment (the difference between the sales price and the appraised value). If appraised value is higher than the sales price, the sales price is considered the property value. The buyer does not get a financial "bonus" from the lender for negotiating a price that is lower than the property's appraised value.

    Conventional Loans 
        Conventional loans are viewed as the most secure loans because their loan-to-value ratios are often lowest. The ratio may be 80% of the value of the property or less because the borrower may make a down payment of at least 20%. Because the payment of the debt rests on the ability of the borrower to pay, the lender carefully evaluates both the property and the prospective borrower. In determining the amount of the loan, the lender relies primarily on its appraisal of the property. To decide the buyer's willingness and ability to pay, information from credit reports, the buyer's credit score, and other factors, such as qualifying ratios and work history, are very important. Usually with a 20% down payment and a conventional loan, no additional insurance or guarantee on the loan is necessary to protect the lender's interest. A loan with less than a 20% down payment usually will require private mortgage insurance. A conventional loan is not government insured or guaranteed, unlike FHA-insured and VA-guaranteed loans.
            In Practice
                A foreclosure can be a long, messy proposition that has a negative effect on the borrower, the borrower's family, and the neighborhood in which the property is located. Even after a foreclosure, the lender can sue a defaulting borrower on the promissory note when it is a "recourse" loan that allows the lender to obtain a deficiency judgment against the borrower's assets. Lenders usually do not want to take this route unless it is absolutely necessary. Making sure that both property and borrower are qualified for the requested financing is the best protection against an unsuccessful loan.

        Today, the secondary mortgage market has a significant impact on borrower qualifications, standards for the collateral, and documentation procedures followed by lenders. Loans must meet strict criteria to be sold to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Lenders still can be flexible in their lending decisions, but they may not be able to sell unusual loans in the secondary market. Fannie Mae's Eligibility Matrix showing its eligibility requirements is at www.fanniemae.com/content/eligibility_information/eligibility-matrix.pdf.
        The Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) publishes the maximum loan limits for loans sold to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Beginning January 1, 2018, the maximum loan limit for a single-family home was set from $453,100 to $679,650, in high-cost areas. Specific loan limits are established for each county (or equivalent), and the loan limit may be lower for each specific high-cost area. Updates on loan limits are at www.fanniemae.com/singlefamily/loan-limits.
        Loans that exceed the stated limits are called nonconforming loans or jumbo loans and are not marketable, but they may be held in the lender's investment portfolio, along with other loans the lender may have made that don't meet the underwriting guidelines of FHA, VA, or Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac. A real estate professional who is aware that such portfolio loans are possible may find this knowledge valuable when working with a borrower in unusual circumstances and a lender who is flexible.

    Private Mortgage Insurance 
        One way a borrower can obtain a conventional mortgage loan with a down payment that is less than 20% of the purchase price is by obtaining private mortgage insurance (PMI). The borrower purchases an insurance policy that provides the lender with funds in the event of borrower default on the loan. This allows the lender to assume more risk so that the loan-to-value ratio can be higher than for other conventional loans. PMI protects the top portion of a loan, usually 20% to 30%, against borrower default. This means that, if the property is sold at a foreclosure sale for less than the outstanding balance of the loan, the PMI usually is enough to make up the difference.
        The borrower pays a monthly premium or fee while PMI is in force, which may be made part of the loan payment. The Homeowner's Protection Act of 1998 (HPA) requires that the lender automatically terminate the PMI payment if the borrower has accrued at least 22% equity in the home and is current on mortgage payments.
            In Practice
                The 22% of equity that HPA has set as the point at which PMI can be canceled is based on the purchase price of the home. If market appreciation or improvements made by the borrower have increased the value of the home, the lender is not required by HPA to consider those factors but may be willing to do so. The borrower must contact the lender to find out how to proceed. The lender may require an appraisal, at the borrower's expense, to document the increase in value.

    FHA-insured loans 
        The Federal Housing Administration (FHA), which operates under HUD, neither builds homes nor lends money. The term FHA loan actually refers to a loan that is insured by the agency. An FHA-insured loan must be made by an FHA-approved lending institution. The FHA insurance provides additional security to the lender. As with private mortgage insurance, the FHA insures lenders against loss from borrower default. For information on FHA programs, go to www.hud.gov and enter "FHA Resource Center" in the search box at the top of the page.
        The most popular FHA program covers fixed-rate loans for 10 to 30 years on one- to four-family residences. FHA does not set interest rates, but it does limit lender fees and specifies how closing costs and down payment may be paid and by whom, and regulates rate increases and caps on adjustable-rate loans. FHA-insured loans are competitive with other types of loans, often because an FHA-insured loan can be made even when the borrower makes a relatively low down payment, resulting in a high LTV. The maximum loan amounts that FHA will insure, by state and county, are available by going to www.hud.gov and entering "FHA mortgage limits" in the search box. By law, FHA loans cannot charge prepayment penalties.
        Other types of FHA-insured loans include adjustable-rate mortgages, home improvement and rehabilitation loans, and loans for the purchase of condominiums. Specific standards for condominium complexes and the ratio of owner-occupants to renters must be met for a loan on a condominium unit to be insured by FHA.
        Currently, a borrower can obtain an FHA-insured loan with a down payment as low as 3.5% of the purchase price on a one- to four-unit structure, and certain closing costs can be included in the loan amount. A lower down payment may be possible with one of the special programs discussed later in this section. The borrower is charged a mortgage insurance premium (MIP) for all FHA loans. The borrower is also responsible for paying an annual premium that is usually charged monthly. The up-front premium is charged on all FHA loans, except those for the purchase of a condominium, which require only a monthly MIP.
        The mortgaged real estate must be appraised by an approved FHA appraiser, and the borrower must meet standard FHA credit qualifications. Financing for manufactured homes and factory-built housing is also available, both for those who own the land that the home is on and also for manufactured homes that are, or will be, located on another plot of land.
        If the purchase price exceeds the FHA-appraised property value, the buyer may pay the difference in cash as part of the down payment, although some exceptions are made for special programs

    Discount points 
        The lender of an FHA-insured loan may charge discount points in addition to a loan origination fee. The payment of points is a matter of negotiation between the seller and the buyer. As of November 2009, if the seller pays more than 6% of the costs normally paid by the buyer (such as discount points, the loan origination fee, the mortgage insurance premium, buydown fees (prepaid interest), other prepaid items, and impound or escrow amounts), the lender will treat the payments as a reduction in sales price and recalculate the mortgage amount accordingly.

    Assumption Rules 
        A qualified buyer may assume an existing FHA-insured loan. The application consists of a credit check to demonstrate whether the person assuming the loan is financially qualified. The process is quicker and less expensive than applying for a new loan. Sometimes, the older loan has a lower interest rate and no appraisal is required.
        The assumption rules for FHA-insured loans vary, depending on the date the loan was originated. As of December 15, 1989, an assumption is not permitted without complete buyer qualification.

    HUD home sales 
        Foreclosures of FHA-insured homes by HUD provide opportunities for both homebuyers and investors. HUD accepts bids on foreclosed properties only from real estate professionals who are registered with HUD and does not deal with the general public directly. Properties are sold in "as-is" condition, which means that HUD will not make repairs prior to the sale. Some homes can need extensive work, which also means that minimum bids can be set quite low, making a purchase of such a property a good investment for a buyer willing to make the required renovations.
        HUD allows an early bidding period for those who intend to be owner-occupants; properties are made available to investors only after that period has elapsed, if the property remains unsold. HUD has special programs that may offer a reduced down payment on property that is purchased with an FHA-insured loan. HUD's Good Neighbor Next Door program is intended to help revitalize certain areas by allowing law enforcement officers, firefighters, emergency medical technicians, and pre-kindergarten through grade 12 teachers to purchase eligible property in those areas at a 50% discount off the list price. The buyer must occupy the property as the buyer's sole residence for a minimum of 36 months. Property listings, which are available in about 10 states, and more information on HUD property sales and programs can be found at www.hudhomestore.com

    VA-guaranteed loans 
        The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is authorized to guarantee loans used to purchase or construct homes for eligible veterans and their spouses (including unremarried spouses of veterans whose deaths were service-related). The VA also guarantees loans to purchase manufactured homes and the lots on which to place them.
        A veteran who meets any of the following time-in-service criteria is eligible for a VA-guaranteed loan:
            90 days of active service for service people currently on active duty and veterans of at least 90 days of active service during World War II, the Korean War, the Vietnam conflict, and the Gulf War (which extends to the present time)
            A minimum of 181 days of active service during interconflict periods between July 26, 1947, and September 6, 1980
            Two full years of service during any peacetime period since 1980 (since 1981 for officers) or the full period (at least 181 days) for which the veteran was called or ordered to active duty
            Six or more years of continuous duty as a reservist in the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, or Coast Guard, or as a member of the Army or Air National Guard
        The VA assists veterans in financing the purchase of homes with little or no down payment at market interest rates. The VA issues rules and regulations that set forth the qualifications, limitations, and conditions under which a loan may be guaranteed. The owner must live on the property. The veteran must apply for a certificate of eligibility. This certificate sets forth the maximum guarantee to which the veteran is entitled, but the veteran must still qualify for the loan with the lender. For individuals with full eligibility, no down payment is required for a loan up to the maximum guarantee limit.
        There is no VA dollar limit on the amount of the loan a veteran can obtain; this limit is determined by the lender and the qualification of the buyer. The VA limits the amount of the loan it will guarantee, however. For 2018, the guarantee limit was 25% of a loan of up to $453,100 on a one-unit property for most of the country, with a higher loan limit for some areas of Alaska, California, Colorado, District of Columbia, Florida, Guam, Hawaii, Idaho, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Utah, Virginia, Virgin Islands, Washington, West Virginia, and Wyoming.
            In Practice
                The VA loan guarantee is tied to the current conforming loan limit for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. On a conforming loan of $453,100, the VA guarantee is $453,100 × 25%, or $113,275.
        The VA also issues a certificate of reasonable value (CRV) for the property being purchased. The CRV states the property's current market value based on a VA-approved appraisal. The CRV places a ceiling on the amount of a VA-guaranteed loan allowed for the property. If the purchase price is greater than the amount cited in the CRV, the veteran may pay the difference in cash.
        The VA borrower pays a loan origination fee to the lender, as well as a funding fee to the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. The funding fee is a percentage of the loan amount; the percentage varies based on the type of loan ad military category of the veteran. There is no funding fee for
            a veteran who is receiving VA compensation for a service-connected disability,
            a veteran who would be entitled to receive compensation for a service-connected disability if the veteran did not receive retirement or active duty pay, or
            the surviving spouse of a veteran who died in service or from a service-connected disability.

        Other loan Costs 
            The lender sets the loan interest rate, discount points, and closing costs. Closing costs such as the VA's property appraisal, the credit report, state and local taxes, and recording fees may be paid by the veteran purchaser, the seller, or shared by both. The veteran is not allowed to pay for the termite report, unless the loan is a refinance. No commissions, brokerage fees, or buyer broker fees may be charged to the veteran buyer.
            The seller is allowed to pay for some closing costs, up to 4% of the loan amount, including prepaid closing costs, the VA funding fee, payoff of credit balances or judgments for the veteran, and temporary interest buydowns. Reasonable discount points may be charged on a VA-guaranteed loan, and either the veteran or the seller may pay them. Discount points are not included in the 4% limit. 

        Prepayment privileges 
            As with an FHA-insured loan, the borrower under a VA-guaranteed loan can prepay the debt at any time without penalty.

        Assumption rules 
            VA-guaranteed loans made on or after March 1, 1988, are no longer assumable without prior consent from the lender.

        Agricultural Loan Programs 
            The Farm Service Agency (FSA) is a federal agency of the Department of Agriculture. The FSA offers programs to help families purchase or operate family farms and has taken over the functions of the former Farmers Home Administration (FmHA). Through the Rural Housing and Community Development Service (RHCDS), FSA also provides loans to help families purchase or improve single-family homes in rural areas (generally areas with populations of fewer than 10,000 people). FSA loan programs fall into two categories: guaranteed loans that are made and serviced by private lenders and guaranteed for a specific percentage by the FSA, and loans made directly by the FSA. More information on FSA programs can be found at www.fsa.usda.gov.
            The Farm Credit System (Farm Credit) provides loans to farmers, ranchers, rural homeowners, agricultural cooperatives, rural utility systems, and agribusinesses. Unlike commercial banks, Farm Credit banks and associations do not take deposits. Instead, loanable funds are raised through the system-wide sale of bonds and notes in capital markets.

    Other Financing Techniques 
        Package Loan 
            A package loan includes real and personal property. In recent years, these kinds of loans have been very popular with developers and purchasers of unfurnished condominiums. Package loans usually include furniture, drapes, the kitchen range, microwave oven, refrigerator, dishwasher, washer, dryer, and other appliances as part of the sales price of the home.
        Blanket Loan 
            A blanket loan covers more than one parcel or lot. It is usually used by a developer to finance a subdivision, but it can also be used to finance the purchase of improved properties or to consolidate multiple loans on a single property. A blanket loan usually includes a provision known as a partial release clause. This clause permits the borrower to obtain the release of any one lot or parcel from the blanket lien by repaying a certain amount of the loan. The development lender issues a partial release from the mortgage lien on the entire property for each parcel sold. The release form from the lender will include a provision that the lien will continue to cover all other unreleased lots. In this way, the lender retains a security interest in the unsold property for the remaining development loan balance, yet each purchaser of an improved or unimproved lot can obtain secured financing on that parcel.
                In Practice
                    Developer M has obtained financing for Shady Acres, a residential development, under the terms of a blanket loan issued by First State Bank. M grades the property, brings in utility lines, builds roads, and then markets the buildable lots to construction companies. As each lot or group of lots is sold, First State Bank is paid a proportionate share of its development loan by the developer and releases its lien rights as to that parcel. This allows each of the purchasers to obtain financing that will cover building construction costs. The purchaser of more than one lot may obtain a blanket loan that will release that lender's lien as to individual properties when construction is completed and properties are sold to home buyers. Each homebuyer can then obtain a mortgage loan secured by the property.
        Open-End Loan 
            An open-end loan provides a security interest when a note is executed by the borrower to the lender, but also secures any future advances of funds made by the lender to the borrower. The interest rate on the initial amount borrowed is fixed, but interest on future advances may be charged at the market rate in effect at that time. An open-end loan is often a less costly alternative to a home improvement loan. It allows the borrower to increase the debt to its original amount, or the maximum amount stated in the note, after the debt has been reduced by payments over a period of time. The note will include the terms and conditions under which the loan can be opened, and the provisions for repayment.
        Construction lean 
            A construction loan is made to finance the construction of improvements on real estate such as homes, apartments, and office buildings. The lender commits to the full amount of the loan but disburses the funds in payments during construction. These payments are also known as draws. Draws are made to the general contractor or the owner for that part of the construction work that has been completed since the previous payment. Before each payment, the lender inspects the work. The general contractor must provide the lender with adequate waivers that release all mechanics' lien rights for the work covered by the payment
            Construction loans are generally short-term or interim financing. The borrower pays interest only on the monies that have actually been disbursed. The borrower is expected to arrange for a permanent loan, also known as an end loan or take-out loan, which will pay off (take out) the construction financing lender when the work is completed by paying the principal owed on the construction loan.
        Sale-and-leaseback 
            Sale-and-leaseback arrangements, while not loans, are used to finance large commercial or industrial properties. The land and the building, usually used by the seller for business purposes, are sold to an investor. The real estate then is leased back by the investor to the seller, who continues to conduct business on the property as a tenant. The buyer becomes the landlord, and the original owner becomes the tenant. This enables a business to free money tied up in real estate to be used as working capital.
        Buydown 
            A buydown is a way to temporarily (or permanently) lower the interest rate on a mortgage or deed of trust loan. Perhaps a homebuilder wishes to stimulate sales by offering a lower-than-market rate. Or a first-time residential buyer may have trouble qualifying for a loan at the prevailing rates. The buyer's relatives or the sellers might want to help the buyer qualify. In any case, a lump sum is paid in cash to the lender at the closing. The payment offsets (and so reduces) the interest rate and monthly payments during the mortgage's first few years. Typical buydown arrangements reduce the interest rate by 1% to 2% over the first one to two years of the loan term. After that, the rate rises. The hope is that the borrower's income will also increase, making it more likely that the borrower will be able to pay the increased monthly payments. In a permanent buydown, a larger up-front payment reduces the effective interest rate for the life of the loan.
                In Practice
                    As recent history has shown, a borrower should not overestimate the ability to meet future payment obligations. Holding onto employment—with or without an increase in income—may be the best that can be managed. The risk of incurring a property foreclosure should be carefully considered. 
        Home Equity Loan 
            A home equity loan is a source of funds that takes advantage of the equity built up in a home. The original mortgage loan remains in place; the home equity loan is junior to the original lien. Although the home equity loan will carry a higher interest rate than a purchase loan, it is an alternative to refinancing because only the amount borrowed will be subject to the higher rate. As an added benefit, the interest paid on a home equity loan of up to $100,000 is deductible from federal income tax. A home equity loan can be used for a variety of financial needs, such as to
                finance the purchase of an expensive item, such as a boat;
                consolidate existing installment loans or credit card debt; and
                pay medical, education, home improvement, or other expenses.
            A home equity loan can be taken out as a fixed loan amount or as a line of credit. With the home equity line of credit, called a HELOC, the lender extends a line of credit that the borrower can use at will. One downside to a HELOC is that the full amount of the line of credit will appear on the borrower's credit report, even though it is not being used. On the upside, the home equity loan could eventually lead to a new first mortgage loan. The homeowner could refinance all outstanding mortgage loans at some point with a single new loan at an attractive interest rate, in which case the original mortgage loan and the home equity loan would be paid off.
                In Practice
                    The decision to borrow against the equity in a home should not be made lightly. Using the funds to make home improvements should at least result in a higher property value, building up additional equity to replace some or all of that encumbered. The prospect of paying off other kinds of debts (particularly, credit card and auto loans) may be enticing, but those debts probably won't result in the possible loss of one's home. 

    Financing Legislation 
        Regulation Z, enacted by the Federal Reserve Board to enforce the Truth in Lending Act (TILA), requires that credit institutions inform borrowers of the true cost of obtaining credit. With proper disclosures, borrowers can compare the costs of various lenders to avoid the uninformed use of credit. Regardless of the amount, Regulation Z generally applies when a credit transaction is secured by a residence. The regulation does not apply to business or commercial loans or to agricultural loans of any amount. Information on the law can be found at the site of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, www.occ.treas.gov, by entering "truth in lending" in the search box.
        Under TILA, a consumer must be fully informed of all finance charges and the true cost of the financing before a transaction is completed. The finance charge disclosure must include any loan fees, finder's fees, service charges, and points, as well as interest. In the case of a mortgage loan made to finance the purchase of a dwelling, the lender must compute and disclose the annual percentage rate (APR) that takes into account the fees, points, and other charges incurred in loan origination, in addition to the nominal interest rate on the loan
        In 2009, the Helping Families Save Their Homes Act amended TILA by requiring that consumers be notified of the sale or transfer of their mortgage loans. The party acquiring the loan, whether a purchaser or assignee, must provide the required disclosures no later than 30 days after the date on which the loan was acquired. The Consumer Compliance Handbook for Regulation Z can be found at www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/supmanual/cch/til.pdf.
        The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank) transferred most of the Federal Reserve's responsibilities for enforcing TILA in July, 2011, to the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). Information on the reasons why CFPB was created, including mortgage loan abuses by lenders, can be found at www.consumerfinance.gov. CFPB's booklet on TILA is at https://www.consumerfinance.gov/learnmore/

    Creditor 
        A creditor, for purposes of Regulation Z, is any person who extends consumer credit more than 25 times each year or more than 5 times each year if the transactions involve dwellings as security. The credit must be subject to a finance charge or payable in more than four installments by written agreement.

    Three-business-day right of rescission 
        In the case of most consumer credit transactions covered by Regulation Z, the borrower has three business days in which to rescind (cancel) the transaction by notifying the lender. This right of rescission does not apply to owner-occupied residential purchase-money or first mortgage or deed of trust loans. It does, however, apply to refinancing a home mortgage or taking out a home equity loan.

    Advertising 
        Regulation Z provides strict rules for real estate advertisements (in all media, including newspapers, flyers, signs, billboards, websites, radio or television ads, and direct mailings) that refer to mortgage financing terms. General phrases like "flexible terms available" may be used, but if details are given, they must comply with the act. The APR must be stated.
        Advertisements for buydowns or reduced-rate mortgages must include both the term to which the interest rate applies and the APR. If a variable-rate mortgage is advertised, the advertisement must include
            the number and timing of payments,
            the amount of the largest and smallest payments, and
            a statement of the fact that the actual payments will vary between these two extremes.
        Specific credit terms, such as down payment, monthly payment, dollar amount of the finance charge, or term of the loan, are called triggering terms. These terms may not be advertised unless the advertisement includes the following information:
            Cash price
            Required down payment
            Number, amounts, and due dates of all payments
            APR
            Total of all payments to be made over the term of the mortgage (unless the advertised credit refers to a first mortgage or deed of trust to finance the acquisition of a dwelling)

    Penalties 
        A creditor who fails to comply with any requirement of TILA, other than certain advertising provisions, may be held liable to the consumer for actual damages and the cost of any legal action together with reasonable attorney's fees. In other actions, a creditor may be liable to a consumer for twice the amount of the finance charge, at a minimum of $400 and a maximum of $4,000, plus court costs, attorney's fees, and any actual damages. Alternatively, a successful class action alleging that a creditor understated the APR and/or finance charge could make the creditor liable for punitive damages of the lesser of $500,000 or 1% of the creditor's net worth, plus attorney's fees and court costs. In addition, a willful violation is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $5,000, one year's imprisonment, or both.

    Equal Credit Opportunity Act 
        The federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) prohibits discrimination in the lending process based on the credit applicant's race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age (provided the applicant is of legal age), or receipt of public assistance. The ECOA requires that credit applications be considered only on the basis of income, the stability of the source of that income, net worth (total assets and liabilities), and credit rating. Information for consumers is available at www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/0347-your-equal-credit-opportunity-rights
        The protections offered by ECOA are both similar (race, color, religion, and national origin) and different from those of the Fair Housing Act; ECOA includes age, marital status, and receipt of public assistance. Real estate professionals should be aware of the protections offered by this law because their clients should not face discrimination when applying for a loan to buy a property or when applying to rent one.
        A creditor may not consider age unless the applicant is too young to legally sign a contract, which is usually 18, although the creditor may consider age if determining if income will drop due to retirement. Lenders are prohibited from discriminating against recipients of public assistance programs such as food stamps and rent subsidies. Lenders may not ask questions about a spouse, unless the spouse is also applying for credit; they may not discount a woman's income or assume that she will leave the workforce to raise children.
        If a loan application is rejected, ECOA and the federal Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) require that the lender detail the reasons for the rejection in a statement that must be provided to the loan applicant within 30 days. The loan applicant also has the right under FCRA to a free copy of any credit report that was considered in the loan application process. Additional state protections may also apply. Information for consumers is at www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/pdf-0096-fair-credit-reporting-act.pdf.
        The agency that enforces ECOA depends on the type of financial institution involved. The ECOA is enforced by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and the Department of Justice as well as other agencies.

    Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 (CRA)
        Community reinvestment refers to the responsibility of financial institutions to help meet their communities' needs for low-income and moderate-income housing. Under the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 (CRA), updated in 1995 and 2005, financial institutions are expected to meet the deposit and credit needs of their communities; participate and invest in local community development and rehabilitation projects; and participate in loan programs for housing, small businesses, and small farms. Information on the Community Reinvestment Act and other programs is at www.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/cra_about.htm and www.ffiec.gov/cra/.
        The law requires any federally regulated financial institution to prepare a statement containing
            a definition of the geographic boundaries of its community;
            an identification of the types of community reinvestment credit offered, such as residential housing loans, housing rehabilitation loans, small-business loans, commercial loans, and consumer loans; and
            comments from the public about the institution's performance in meeting its community's needs.
        The institutions must post a public notice that their community reinvestment activities are subject to federal review, and they must make the results of those reviews public.

    Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act 
        The federal Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA) applies to any residential real estate transaction involving a new first mortgage loan. RESPA is designed to ensure that the buyer and the seller are both fully informed of all costs related to closing the transaction. Under the TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure rule (TRID), the disclosures required by TILA and RESPA have been combined into two new disclosure forms created by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
        
        Automated underwriting and scoring 
            For lenders, automated underwriting procedures can shorten loan approvals from weeks to minutes. Automated underwriting also tends to lower the cost of loan application and approval by reducing a lender's time spent on the approval process by as much as 60%. Freddie Mac uses a system called Loan Prospector. As of June 1, 2015, Freddie Mac no longer charges lenders a fee (previously $20 per transaction) to use its automated underwriting service, to encourage its use. Fannie Mae has a system called Desktop Underwriter, which reduces approval time to minutes, based on the borrower's credit report, a paycheck stub, and a drive-by appraisal of the property. Complex or difficult mortgages can be processed in less than 72 hours. Through automated underwriting, one of a borrower's biggest headaches in buying a home—waiting for loan approval—is eliminated. In addition, prospective buyers can strengthen their purchase offer by including proof of loan approval.
            When used in automated underwriting systems, the application of credit scores has become somewhat controversial. Critics of scoring are concerned that the scores may not be accurate or fair, and in the absence of human discretion, they could result in making it more difficult for low-income and minority borrowers to obtain mortgages.
            Freddie Mac has the following to say about automated underwriting:
                Whether using traditional or automated methods, underwriters must consider all three areas of underwriting—collateral, credit reputation, and capacity. When reviewing collateral, underwriters look at house value, down payment, and property type. Income, debt, cash reserves, and product type are considered when underwriters are looking at capacity. Credit scores are simply one consideration when underwriters are reviewing credit reputation. Even lenders who use an automated underwriting system such as Loan Prospector, still rely on human judgment when the scoring system indicates that the loan application is a higher risk.




