Conventional Loans 
    No government involvement 
    1.) Debt repayment is based soley on the borrorwer's ability to repay. 
        a) Loans are not insured or guaranteed. 
    2.) Maximum LTV is 80%. 

Insured Conventional Mortgages 
    1.) Private mortgage insurance (PMI) protects lenders from loss due to a deficiency after foreclosure. 
    2.) A borrower/mortgagor pays PMI when the LTV is above 80%.
        a) PMI does not pay off the full loan. 
         (1) PMI covers a portion of the shortfall between the amount obtained through the REO sale and the outstanding mortgage debt.
        b) The advantage for the brrower is a lower down payment. 
Private Mortgage Insruance (PMI)
    Borrower defaults. (5% equity) 
    Lender FCs then sells (15% PMI coverage) 
    PMI partially indemnifies lender for losses over 80% LTV (80% No Coverage)

5% Down Payment 
95% LTV loan
Pay PMI 

20% Down Payment 
80% LTV Loan 
No PMI 

Consumer Protection Laws 
    Two laws enforced by the Consumer 
        Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB)
            reg z 1.) Truth in Lending Act (TILA) --- loan costs 
                a) Covers all consumer lending, not just real estate 
                b) Annual percentage rte (APR) = true cost of credit and lender charges 
            2.) RESPA -- all closing costs 
                a) Covers real estate professionals, including agents, lenders, title companies, and closers.
                1.) RESPA standardizes clsing practices for one- to four-family residential properties financed by federally related loan lenders. 
                    a) Includes FHA, VA, and conventional loans 
                        Does not include seller financing
                    b) Ensures buyers and sellers receive information of al lsettlement costs 
                    C) Also requires an estimate of a loan cost at application and disclosure of loan costs at closing 
                2.) RESPA prohibits kickbacks to real estate agents for referral of any service related to closing. 
                    Ask broker about how everthing that has to be disclosed will be disclosed 
                3.) RESPA restricts the amount of advance escrow payments (taxes and insurance) required by lenders. 

        Truth in Lending Act (TILA) === Federal Reserve Regulation Z 
            1.) Purpose: to promote the informed use of consumer credit by requiring advance disclosures of loan terms and costs
                a.) Four primary disclosures required of lenders. 
                    1.) The true cost of credit is expressed as APR (annual percentage rate)
                        (a) the APR, or effective rate, is the actual cost of the loan expressed as an annual percentage rate. 
                        (b) the APR will be higher than the face rate or nominal interest rate 
                    2.) The total finance charges associated with the loan include nominal interest, origination or assumption fee, borrower-paid points, and mortgage insurance costs. 
                    3.) The total number and amount of all payment must be disclosed by the lender 
                    4.) The total amount financed must be disclosed by the lender. 
                b.)Applies to al lconsumer loans, including mortgages 
                    (1) Does not apply to 
                        (a) loans to entites (i.e., corporations), 
                        (b) business or commercial laons, and 
                        (c) seller financing (purchase money mortgage or contract for deed) 
            2.) Right of rescission 
                a) TILA requires a three-day right of rscission for refiances of owner-occupied, one- to fouruhnit properties and home equity loans 
                    (1) Rescission does not apply to honme purchase or construction loans 
            3.) Advertising requirements 
                a) The asking PRICE adn APR are the only finance terms allowed in an advertisement wihtout full disclousre 
                b) Mention of down payment interest rate, montlhy payment, or number of pyaments TRIGGERS FULL DISCLOSURE (the small print)
                c) General statement (e.g., "low down payment", or the amount of property taxes or HOA dues) not related to financing are allowed. 
            Example ad: 
                1) $150,000 purchase price with an APR of 5.5%; call for other great terms; HOA $50 per month; taxes $1,200 per year" (no trigger) 
                2) $150,000 purchase price with 100% financing and a payment of $675 per month" (would trigger full disclosure)
            4.) Remember 
                A) Truth in Lending Act = disclosure of all loan cost 
                B) RESPA = disclosure of all costs to close 
        TIRD = TILA/RESPA Integrated Disclousre
            1) Loan Estimate (LE) 
                a) Combines TILA and RSPA requirements and shows both APR/lender costs and all estimated loan costs 
                    (1) Information presented to help consumers better understand loan and closing costs
                b) Must be *provided to the borrower no later than 3 business days* after loan application, and consumer must acknowledge receipt
            2) Closing Disclosure (CD) 
                a) The CD must be provided to the borrower no later than three business days before closing. 
                    1) Lender must have proof of receipt. 
                b) if certain chagnes are made to the loan, a new three-day review period is required. This will delay closing. 
                c) The changes that will dealay the transcation include the follwoing: 
                1) An increase in the annual rate (APR) of; 
                    A) more than 1/8% on fixed-rate loans, or 
                    b) 1/4% on variable-rate loans 
                2) Addition of a prepayment penalty
                3) The basic loan product changes 
                    Note: Other last-minute changes to the closing Disclosure will generally not require a new review periods
            3) Lender responsible for timely delivery of the LE and CD to consumer 
            4) Applies to all federally related residential mortgage loans 
                a) exceptions 
                    (1) Home equity lines of credit 
                    (2) Mobile homes 
                    (3) Reverse mortgages 
                    (4) Seller financing (contract for deed and purchase money mortgages) 
        Equal Credit Opportuinity ACT (ECOA) 
            1. The purpose of ECOA is to make consumer credit available with fiarnes sand imparialtiy. 
                a) Membership in a protected class should have no bearing on qualifying for a loan 
            2 Prohibits discrimination in all consumer credit rtanscations 
                a) Protected categories include 
                    1) Race, color, religion, national origin, sex, martial status, dependence on public assistance, and age. 
            3.) ECOA add teh protected classes of arital status, age, and public assistance (MAP) 
                A) ECOA does not protect minors, families with children, or those with an erratic emplyment hsitory or bad credit. 
            4.) Lenders are required to provide a written notice of why a borrower was denied a loan.
            
                         

















