Management and maintenance of condominium building exteriors and common areas is provided by 
    The Answer is: The Governing Association
        Explanation: Management and maintenance of the exterior and common areas of a condominium building is provided by the governing association, which typically uses the services of a management company, as well as outside contractors. 


Which factor primarily affects supply in the real estate market? 
    Governmental Monetary Policy 
        Explanation: Population, demographics and employment impact demand for a commodity, but governmental monetary policy strongly influences the supply and value of property in a local market. 

Real estate is unique and immobile. This means that 
    The Answer is: The market adjusts slowly to the forces of supply and demand. 
        Explanation: Because of the uniqueness and immobility of real estate, the market for real estate reacts slowly to the forces of supply and demand, which are subject to changes in the national financial market as well as natural disasters. 

The use of borrowed money to finance an investment is called 
    The Answer is: Leverage. 
        Explanation: As a rule, an investor can receive a maximum return from the initial investment by making a small down payment, paying a low interest rate, and spreading mortgage payments over as long a period as possible. 

Information including age, education, behavior and other characteristics of members in a certain population is 
    The Answer is: Demographics 
        Explanation: These factors are important because they contribute to the amount of type of housing needed. 

The BEST way for owners to determine the market value of their home is to 
    The Answer is: get an appraisal 
        Explanation:  The key word here is BEST. the most accurate way to determine value is to have an appraisal. Only if an appraisal is not available would a CMA be a good answer. 

In many states, the real estate sales associate is 
    The Answer is: A licensed real estate salesperson. 
        Explanation: Some states require all real estate licensees to have a broker's license, while others issue separate licenses to brokers and salespersons, but all recognize that sales associates work for an employing broker, ho is responsible for the sales associates' conduct. 

Special-Purpose real estate includes 
    The Answer is: Churches, Schools, Cemeteries and Government-Held Lands. 
        Explanation: Special-purpose real estate includes churches, schools, cemeteries, and government-held lands. 

Commercial Real Estate Includes 
    The Answer is: Office space, shopping centers, and stores, as well as theaters, hotels, and parking facilities. 
        The explanation: Warehouses, factories, and land in industrial districts are considered industrial properties. 

A licensed real estate broker is permitted to charge a fee for providing services involving real estate EXCEPT 
    The Answer is: Appraising 
        The explanation: While a real estate licensee may be asked to estimate a property's likely sales price, most transactions require a licensed or certified real estate appraiser to develop an opinion of a property's market value. 

Which factor is MOST likely to influence demand for real estate? 
    The Answer is: Wage levels and employment opportunities 
        The Explanation: When wage levels and job expansion are increasing, workers are more likely to buy real estate; when job opportunities are scarce or wage levels low, demand for real estate usually drops. 

Residential real estate includes 
    The Answer is: Property used for single-family or multifamily dwellings, whether in urban, suburban, or rural areas. 
        The Explanation: Residential real estate includes all property used for single-family or multifamily housing, wherever it is located. 

A professional opinion of a property's market value, based on established methods and using trained judgment, is performed by 
    The Answer is: A real estate appraiser. 
        The Explanation: Although real estate professionals, counselors, and inspectors also look closely at a specific property, only an appraiser is qualified to produce a formal opinion of value--an appraisal. 

In General, when the supply of a certain commodity increases 
    The Answer is: The price tends to drop. 
        The Explanation: If demand is constant and supply increases, sellers compete with each other by lowering prices. 

When the supply of a commodity decreases while demand remains the same, price tends to 
    The Answer is: Rise 
        The Explanation:  Under the laws of supply and demand, if supply of a commodity decreases with demand remaining the same or increasing, prices go up. 

A real estate firm or an individual real estate professional 
    The Answer is: Rarely performs all the services or handles all classes of property.
        The Explanation: Although it is possible for a single real estate firm or an individual real estate professional to perform all the services and handle all classes of property discussed here (unless restricted by a state's license law), this is rarely done, except in small towns. 

Mixed-use real estate is property that allows for 
    The Answer is: Two uses-commercial and residential-in the same building
        The Explanation: Mixed-use real estate is property that allows for two different uses--commercial and residential--in the same building. 

MOST real estate transcations involve 
    The Answer is: A purchasing a residential property. 
        The Explanation: Home Sales are the most common real estate transaction. 

