Requirements for a valid deed

Although formal requirements vary, a valid deed generally must contain the following elements:

    Grantor who has the legal competency to execute the deed
    Grantee named with reasonable certainty to be identified
    Statement of consideration (usually required for recording of the deed)
    Granting clause (words of conveyance)
    Habendum clause, which defines the ownership right received by the grantee
    Accurate legal description of the property conveyed
    Any relevant exceptions or reservations to conveyance of full title
    Acknowledgment (notarization) of the signature of the grantor
    Delivery of the deed and acceptance by the grantee to pass title


    Granting clause

A deed must contain a granting clause, or words of conveyance, that states the grantor's intention to convey the property. Depending on the type of deed and the obligations agreed to by the grantor, the wording would be similar to one of the following:

    "I, JKL, convey and warrant . . ."
    "I, JKL, remise, release, alienate, and convey . . ."
    "I, JKL, grant, bargain, and sell . . ."
    "I, JKL, remise, release, and quitclaim . . ."

A deed that conveys the grantor's entire fee simple interest usually contains wording such as "to ABC and to her heirs and assigns forever." If less than the grantor's complete fee simple interest is conveyed, such as a life estate, the wording must indicate that less than a full interest is being conveyed—for example, "to ABC for the duration of her natural life."

Certain deeds may be exempted from the tax, such as the following:

    Gifts of real estate
    Deeds not made in connection with a sale (such as a change in the form of co-ownership)
    Conveyances to, from, or between government bodies
    Deeds by charitable, religious, or educational institutions
    Deeds securing debts or releasing property as security for a debt
    Partitions
    Tax deeds
    Deeds pursuant to mergers of corporations
    Deeds from subsidiary to parent corporations for cancellations of stock

    