Rate of Return 
    Over time ---say, 10 to 20 years or more -- a real estate investment typically shows an above-average (or even high) rate of return.
    In some parts of the country, an impressive return can be received even after a relatively short period of ownership.
    In theory, this means that an investor can use borrowed money to finance a real estate purchase and feel relatively sure that the asset, if held long enough, will return a profit, even after accounting for the cost to finance the purchase. 

Control 
    Real estate investments also offer more immediate advantages. 
    Real estate offers investors more control over their investments than other options, such as stocks, bonds, or other securities.
    The real estate marketplace consists of buyers and sellers who deal directly with each other. 

Appreciation 
    Real Estate is an avenue of investment open to those interested in holding property primarily for increasing value, known as APPRECIATION.
    During a period of inflation, of course, the value of all property will rise, but so will the costs of maintaining the property.
    The INTRINSIC VALUE 
        of real estate is the result of individual choices and preferences for a given geographic area. 
    Residential property in a pleasant neighborhood near employment, shopping, and amentities, will tend to retain and increase in value. 
    Commercial property located close to transportation, suppliers, and source of employees will also tend to increase in value. 

Equity Buildup 
    The amount invested in a property is the owner's EQUITY.
    If the property is financed, the only equity at first is the amount paid as a down payment. 
    As the owner pays down the amount owed by regular payments, however, and if the payments include payment of part of the principal owed on the loan, that principal increases the owner's equity in the property. 
    Appreciation, too, will result in EQUITY BUILDUP as the value of the property increases. 
    Accumulated equity is not realized as cash unless a property is sold or refinanced. 
    Equity may be lost if a property's value decreases due to economic conditions or a natural disaster, even if the property is not sold.

Leverage 
    Leverage is the use of borrowed money to finance an investment. 
    It can be a way to benefit from the potential for increased income from a relatively small initial outlay.
    As a rule, an investor can receive a maximum return from an initial investment by making a small down payment, paying a low interest rate, and spreading mortgage payments over as long a period as possible.

    The risk of an investment is directly proportional to leverage. 
    A high degree of leverage translates into greater risk for the investor, as well as for the lender, because of the high ratio of borrowed money to the value of the property.
    Lower leverage results in less risk. 
    When property values drop, for whatever reason, the highly leveraged investor may be unable to pay even the financing costs of the property. 

Tax Benefits
    Income tax laws change frequently, and some tax advantages of owning investment real estate are altered periodically by Congress. 
    An investor can make a more educated and profitable real estate purchase with professional tax advice.
    The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) www.irs.gov is the best place to start for federal tax information. 
    State and local taxing authorities offer different tax incentives (and disincentives) to investors and information should be sought from those sources, as well. 
    The following are some of the current federal tax benefits available to investors. 

        Depreciation or COST RECOVERY 
            allows an investor to recover the cost of an income producing asset through tax deductions over the asset's useful life. 
            Though investors rarely purchase property without expecting it to appreciate over time, the tax laws recognize that all physical structures deteriorate and lose value over time. 
            Land is not considered a depreicating asset. 

        Capital Gain 
            Is the difference between the purchase price or property and its net selling price. 
            A Property's cost (or basis), determines the amount of gain to be taxed. 
            The investor's initial cost of the property may be increased by physical improvements made to the property, which will add to the property's tax basis. 
            On the other handk the amount of any depreciation claimed as a tax deduction is subtracted from the basis, resulting in the property's adjusted basis for tax purposes. 
            When the investor sells the property, the amount by which the sales price exceeds the property's adjusted basis is the capital gain. 

        One way to avoid federal taxation on a capital gain is to exchange the investment property for one of the same value. 
        The tax that would have been owed if a sale had occurred is deferred until the property acquired in the exchanged is sold. 
        At present, there is not limit to the number of times that a property can be exchanged and taxation deferred. 
        There are strict rules governing property exchanges, and failure to fully comply with the rules can mean the loss of the deferral. 
        The law permitting tax-deferred exchanges is also subject to chagne as Congress considers ways to increase income to the federal treasury. 