Prices for goods and services in the market are established by the operation of supply and demand. 
The supply is the quantity of goods or services that can be sold at a given price. 
In the real estate market, the supply is made up of residential and commercial land and structures. 
Demand refers to the quantity of goods or services that consumers are willing and able to buy at a given price. 
In the real estate market, the number of homebuyers and businesses seeking to buy property can vary greatly depending on general economic conditions. 

When supply and demand are roughly balanced, prices are stable and there is neither inflation (prices increasing) or deflation (prices decreasing). 
When supply increases and demand fails to increase commensurately, prices go down; when demand increases and demands fails to increase commensurately, prices go down; when demand increases and supply fails to increase commensurately, prices go down; when demand increases and supply fails to increase sufficiently to satisfy that demand, prices go up. 
Greater supply means producers need to attract more buyers, so they lower prices.
Greater demand means producers can raise their prices because buyers compete for the product. 


    Supply and demand in the real estate market
        Two characteristics of real estate govern the way the market reacts to the pressures of supply and demand: uniqueness and immobility. 
            UNIQUENESS 
                means that, no matter how identical they may appear, no two parcels of real estate are ever exactly alike; each occupies its own unique geographic location. 
            IMMOBILITY 
                refers to the fact that property cannot be relocated to satisfy demand where supply is lowk, nor can buyers always relocate to areas with greater supply. 
                    For these reasons, real estate markets are local markets. 
        Each grographic area has different types of real estate and different conditions that drive prices. 
        In these well-defined areas, real estate offices can keep track of the types of property that are in demand, as well as the properties taht are available to meet that demand. 
        
        Because of real estate's uniquessness and immobility, the market generally adjusts slowly to the forces of supply and demand. 
        Though a home offered for sale can be withdrawn in response to low demand and high supply, it is just as likely that oversupply will result in lower prices. 
        When supply is low, on the other hand, a high demand may not be met immediately because development adn construction are lengthy processes. 
        As a result, development tends to occur in uneven spurts of activity. 

        Even when supply and demand can be forecast with some accuracy, natural disasters such as hurricanes and earthquakes can disrupt market trends. 
        Similarly, a sudden change in the national financial market, a local event such as a business closure, or a regional disruption caused by storm damage can dramatically disrupt a seemingly stable market. 
        
    Factors affecting supply 
        Factors that tend to affect the supply side of the real estate market's supply and demand balance include labor force availability, construction and material costs, and governmental controls and financial polices. 

            Labor force, construction, and material cost 
                A shortage of skilled labor or building materials or an increase in the cost of materials can decrease the amount of new construction.
                High transfer costs, such as taxes and construction permit fees, can also discourgae development. 
                Increased construction costs may be passed along to buyers and tenants in the form of higher sales prices and increased rents that cna futher slow the market. 

            Governmental controls and monetary policy 
                The government's monetary policy can have a substantial impact on the real estate market. 
                The Federal Reserve Board (the Fed) establishes a discount rate of interest for the money it lends to commercial banks. 
                That discount rate has a direct impact on the interest rates the banks charge to borrowers, which in turn plays a significant part in people's ability to buy homes. 
                The Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and the Government National Mortgage Association (Ginnie Mae) can also affect the amount of money available to lenders for mortgage loans. 

                Even apart from financing concerns, virtually any government action has some effect on the real estate market. 
                For instance, federal envirnomental regulations may increase or decrease the supply and value of land in a local market. 
                Real estate taxation is one of the primary sources of revenue for local governments. 
                Policies on taxation of real estate can have either positive or negative effects. 
                While high taxes may deter investors, tax incentives may attract new businesses and industries and bring increased employment and expanded residential real estate markets. 

                Local government also influence supply. 
                Land-use controls, building codes, and zoning ordinances help shape the character of a community and control the use of land. 
                Careful planning can help stabilize, and even increase, real estate values. 

    Factors affecting demand 
        Factors that tend to affect the demand side of the real estate market include population, demographics, and employment and wage levels. 

            Population 
                Because shelter is a basic human need, the demand for housing grows with the population. 
                Although the total population of the country continues to rise, the demand for real estate increases faster in some areas than in others. 
                In some locations, growth has ceased altogther or the population has declined. 
                    This may be due to economic changes (such as business closings), social concerns (such as the quality of schools or a desire for more open space), or population changes (such as population shifts from colder to warmer climates).
                The result can be a drop in demand for real estate in one area, which may be matched by increased demand elsewhere. 

            Demographics 
                The study and description of a population is called DEMOGRAPHICS. 
                The population of a community is a major factor in determining the qunatity and type of housing in that community. 
                The number of occupants per household and their ages, the ratio of adults to children, the number of retiress, family income, and lifestyle are all demographic factors that contribute to the amount and type of housing needed. 

                    NICHE MARKETING 
                        The phrase used to refer to the targeted marketing of specific demographic populations. 

            Employment and Wage Levels 
                Decisions about whether to buy or rent and how much to spend on housing are closely realted to income. 
                When job opportunities are scarce or wage levels low, demand for real estate usually drops. 
                The market might, in fact, be affected drastically by a single major employer moving in or shutting down.  
                Real estate professional should stay informed about the business plans of local employers. 

                As you hvae seen, the real estate market depends on a variety of economic forces, such as interest rates and employment levels. 
                To be successful, real estate professionals must follow economic trends and anticipate where those trends will lead. 
                How people use their income depends on consumer confidence, which is based not only on perceived job security but also on the availability of credit and the impact of inflation. 
                General trends in the ecnomy, such as the availability of mortgage money and the rate of inflation, will influence people's spending decisions. 

                
