Contracts Used In The Real Estate Business
    The written agreement most commonly used by real estate professionals are 
        Client representation agreements
        Real estate sales contracts 
        Options 
        Escrow agreements 
        Property management agreements 
        leases, and 
        owener financing contracts, such as land contracts or contracts for deed. 

    Use of contract forms
        A real estate professional who si not a licensed attorney cannot practice law. The many states guidelines which specify the activities that are not considered the practice of law or which can be performed by non-attorneys, are created by state real estate officials, court decisions, or statutes. 
        Often, brokerage representation agreements, agency and property disclosure forms, and parts of residential property sales agreements must comply word for word with statutory language. 
        

Provisions of a sales contract
    All real estate sales contracts contain a number of provisions, or clauses. Most sales contracts include the following information:
        Purchaser's name and a statement of the purchaser's obligation to purchase the property, sometimes including how the purchaser intends to take title
        Adequate description of the property, such as the street address; while a street address is adequate to describe most residential properties in a sales contract, it is not adequate for the legal description that will be included in the deed
        Seller's name and a statement of the type of deed the seller agrees to provide, including any covenants, conditions, and restrictions
        Purchase price and how the purchaser intends to pay for the property, including earnest money deposits, additional cash from the purchaser, and the conditions of any anticipated mortgage financing
        Identification of the closing or settlement agent and closing or settlement instructions
        Date for the closing of the transaction and the transfer of possession of the property to the purchaser
        Title evidence that will be satisfactory to the buyer
        Method by which real estate taxes, rents, fuel costs, and other expenses are to be prorated
        Outcome of the contract should the property be damaged or destroyed between the time of signing and the closing date
        Liquidated damages, specific performance, or other statement of remedies available in the event of default
        Contingencies or conditions of the sale
        Personal property to be left with the premises for the purchaser (such as major appliances or lawn and garden equipment)
        Fixtures or other items that could be considered part of the real property that are to be removed by the seller before the closing (such as a chandelier or fireplace screen)
        Transfer of any applicable warranties on items such as heating and cooling systems or built-in appliances
        Identification of any leased equipment that must be transferred to the purchaser or returned to the lessor (such as cable television boxes or a water softener)
        Transfer or payment of any outstanding special assessments
        Purchaser's right to inspect the property shortly before the closing or settlement (often called the final walk-through)
        Documents to be provided by each party and when and where they will be delivered
        Dated signatures of all parties. In some states, the seller's nonowning spouse may be required to release potential marital or homestead rights. In most states, there must be an agency disclosure statement that indicates the form of representation provided by the real estate professional(s). Documents can be transmitted and signed electronically using one of a variety of software programs, in compliance with the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act (www.uniformlaws.org), which has been adopted by all states except Illinois, New York, and Washington. Those states have their own laws governing electronic transactions.

    Options
        An option is a contract by which an optionor (generally an owner) gives an optionee (a prospective purchaser or tenant) the right to buy or lease the owner's property at a fixed price within a certain period of time. The optionee pays a fee as consideration for the option right. The optionee must then decide whether to exercise the option right or allow the option to expire. An option is enforceable by the optionee only (a unilateral contract). Options must contain all the elements of a valid contract.











