Ownership in Severalty vs Co-Ownership 
    Ownership in severalty occurs when property is owned by one individual, corporation, or other entity. The term comes from the fact that a sole owner is severed or cut off from other owners. The owner in severalty has sole rights to the property and sole discretion to sell, lease, leave as a bequest in a will, or otherwise transfer part or all of the ownership rights to another person.
        In Practice
            A grandchild has inherited a condominium from a grandparent. The grandchild owns the property in severalty, making the grandchild the sole owner of the condominium, entitled to all of the rights of ownership.

    Co-ownership 
        When title to a parcel of real estate is held by two or more individuals, those parties are called co-owners or concurrent owners. Most states commonly recognize various forms of co-ownership.

Forms of Co-Ownership 
    Forms of Co-Ownership 
        Tenancy in Common 
            A parcel of real estate may be owned by two or more people as tenants in common. In a tenancy in common (TIC), each tenant holds an undivided interest in the property. The co-owners have unity of possession, meaning that each owner is entitled to possession and use of the entire property, even though each holds only a fractional ownership interest. If there are two co-owners of a property, for instance, and no other division is specified in the deed by which the property was received, each owns a one-half interest. It is the ownership interest, not the property, that is divided.
            The deed creating a tenancy in common may or may not state the fractional interest held by each co-owner. If no fractions are stated, the tenants are presumed to hold equal shares; for example, if five people hold title, each owns an undivided one-fifth interest. Each of the shares can also be held by a couple, whether married or in a civil union.
            Because the co-owners own separate interests, they can sell, convey, mortgage, or transfer their individual interests in the TIC without the consent of the other co-owners. A share owned by a married couple can be transferred only with the agreement of both parties.
            No individual tenant may transfer the ownership of the entire property. When one co-owner dies, the tenant's undivided interest passes according to the decedent's will, to the heirs identified by statute if there is no will, or by the terms of the decedent's living trust, if one was established prior to death. (See  Tenancy in Common.)
            When two or more single individuals or couples acquire title to real estate and the form of ownership is not indicated, the new owners are usually determined to have acquired title as tenants in common. The TIC has become popular in expensive urban areas because it allows a multi-family dwelling to be sold to multiple owners without the need to convert the entire property to the condominium form of ownership, which may entail a lengthy and expensive approval process. The downside of a co-owner's TIC interest is that it may not be as easy to sell as property held in a different form of ownership. Formation of a TIC requires use of an attorney to clarify the terms of ownership.
                In Practice 
                    The problem of owning the right to use an entire property, but having only a fractional ownership interest, usually is resolved by agreement of the co-tenants to specify the part of the property that each will use individually and the part of the property that will be shared. In a residential property with three units, for instance, if there are three TIC interests, each co-tenant may, by agreement of all three, occupy a specified unit, with all three having the right to use all other areas, such as a basement storage space or outdoor space. The agreement should also specify how responsibility for property maintenance, expenses, and taxes is to be shared. Unless all three units are very comparable, this is where any differences may be equalized, with the co-tenant who enjoys the use of the largest or most desirable unit paying a larger portion of the expenses.

        Joint Tenancy 
            Most states recognize some form of joint tenancy in property owned by two or more people, whether married or unmarried.
            The distinguishing feature of a joint tenancy is the right of survivorship. Upon the death of a joint tenant, the deceased's interest transfers directly to the surviving joint tenant or tenants. Essentially, there is one less owner. No formal legal action is required, although the death certificate of the deceased owner should be made part of the public record and a copy retained by the surviving owner(s).
            If there are only two joint tenants, the death of one of the owners terminates the joint tenancy. If there are three or more joint tenants, at each successive joint tenant's death, the surviving owners acquire the deceased's interest. The last survivor takes title in severalty and has all the rights of sole ownership, including the right to pass the property to any heirs. (See  Joint Tenancy With Right of Survivorship.)

            Creating a Joint Tenancy 
                A joint tenancy can be created only by the intentional act of conveying a deed or giving the property by will or living trust. It cannot be implied or created by operation of law. The instrument must specifically state the parties' intention to create a joint tenancy, and the parties must be explicitly identified as joint tenants.

                To create a joint tenancy, four elements or unities are needed, which can be remembered as PITT: possession, interest, time, and title.
                    Unity of possession—all joint tenants hold an undivided right to possession.
                    Unity of interest—all joint tenants hold an equal ownership interest.
                    Unity of time—all joint tenants acquire their interests at the same time.
                    Unity of title—all joint tenants acquire their interests by the same document.
                The four requirements or unities are met when the right to possession of a property is acquired by all of the joint owners by means of a single instrument that conveys an equal, undivided interest to all of them, stipulating that they are to be joint owners with the right of survivorship. In some states, identifying the owners as "joint owners" automatically includes the right of survivorship, but use of the wording "with right of survivorship" makes the meaning explicit. Use of a single instrument necessarily means that the right of ownership is conveyed to all of the joint owners at the same time.

            Terminating a Joint Tenancy 
                A joint tenancy is destroyed when any one of the four unities of joint tenancy is terminated. Unless prohibited by state law, joint tenants are free to convey their individual interest in the jointly held property, but doing so destroys the unities of time and title as to that interest. This means that the new owner cannot be a joint tenant, but instead is a tenant in common. If there were only two joint tenants to begin with, the joint tenancy is terminated. If the joint tenancy had more than two owners to begin with, and one of them conveys that interest, there will still be a joint tenancy, but only as to the interests held by the remaining joint tenants; the new owner is a tenant in common.
                    In Practice
                        Sisters A, B, and C hold title to their family home as joint tenants. Sister A conveys her interest to her son, D; D then owns an undivided one-third interest in the property as a tenant in common with B and C, who continue to own their undivided two-thirds interest as joint tenants. (See  Combination of Tenancies.) The difference in the form of ownership means that, unless B and C also convey their separate interests, on the death of either B or C, the surviving sister will be a tenant in common with D, but with a two-thirds interest to D's one-third interest. On the death of the last sister, that sister's share of the TIC will transfer by will or as provided by statute. Unless D is the person to whom the ownership is transferred, D will be a tenant in common with the new owner but D will still have only a one-third interest in the property.

        Termination of Co-Ownership by Partition Suit 
            Partition is a legal way to dissolve the relationship between co-owners of real estate when the parties do not voluntarily agree to its termination. If the court determines that the property cannot be divided physically into separate parcels without destroying its value, the court will order the real estate sold. The proceeds of the sale will then be divided among the co-owners according to their fractional interests.
                In Practice
                    Three friends pooled their money to buy a small farm, with the goal of growing produce organically and selling it in the nearby metropolitan area. After learning the requirements to have their produce USDA-certified as organic, one of the owners decides to sell out. After failing to reach an agreement on a suitable buyout price, the friends end up in court, where a judge decides that the property cannot be divided equally and orders it sold and the proceeds divided among the owners.

        Ownership by Married Couples 
            The property ownership laws of each state identify the forms of property ownership possible within the state. Most states recognize a special form of co-ownership of property that is available only to married couples.
            
            Tenancy by the Entirety 
                Tenancy by the entirety, recognized in half of the states, is a special form of co-ownership used in some states that allows a spouse to inherit the other spouse's ownership interest upon death. In this form of ownership, each spouse has an equal, undivided interest in the property. (The term entirety refers to the fact that the owners are considered one indivisible unit because early common law viewed a married couple as one legal person.) Spouses who are tenants by the entirety have the right of survivorship. During their lives, they can convey title only by a deed signed by both parties. One party cannot convey a one-half interest, and generally they have no right to partition or divide the property.

            Community Property Right 
                Community property laws are based on the idea that spouses, rather than merging into one entity, are equal partners in the marriage. Under community property laws, any property acquired during a marriage is considered to be obtained by mutual effort. Today, nine states (Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin) uphold this concept. In addition, Alaska allows married residents the option of choosing the community property form of ownership. Although community property law varies among the states that recognize it, all of them recognize two kinds of property: separate property and community property.
                Separate property generally is real or personal property that was owned solely by either spouse before the marriage, acquired by gift or inheritance by one spouse during the marriage, or purchased with separate funds during the marriage. Any income earned from a spouse's separate property remains part of that spouse's separate property. Separate property can be mortgaged or conveyed by the owning spouse without the signature of the nonowning spouse.
                    In Practice
                    A spouse who wishes to maintain the character of separate property must be careful not to commingle funds that are separate with funds that belong to the community. If the proceeds of the sale of separate property are placed in a community property bank account, for instance, they may thereafter be considered community funds.
                Community property consists of real and personal property acquired by either spouse during the marriage. Any conveyance or encumbrance of community property requires the signatures of both spouses. Spouses can will their half of the community property to whomever they desire, but upon the death of one spouse, the surviving spouse automatically owns one-half of the remaining property. If a spouse dies without a will, half of the community property already belongs to the surviving spouse and the other half is inherited by the surviving spouse or by the decedent's other heirs, depending on state law. Community property does not provide the automatic right of survivorship that joint tenancy does.

Trusts and Business Organization 
    A trust is a device by which one person transfers ownership of property to someone else to hold or manage for the benefit of a third party. Perhaps a parent wishes to ensure the college education of a child. The parent can transfer an amount sufficient to cover the child's tuition and expenses to a trust account that will be held by the parent's bank, with someone named as trustee of the account. The trustee can be directed to use the funds in the account to pay for the child's college tuition. In this case, the parent is the trustor—the person who creates the trust. The child is the beneficiary—the person who benefits from the trust. The individual named as trustee is the party who holds legal title to the property and is entrusted with carrying out the trustor's instructions regarding the purpose of the trust. The trustee is in the role of a fiduciary, a person who acts in confidence or trust and has a special legal relationship with the beneficiary. The trustee's power and authority are limited by the terms of the trust agreement. A trust can be established during the trustor's lifetime, or by will to take effect at the trustor's death.
        In Practice
           The legal and tax implications of setting up a trust are complex and vary widely from state to state. Attorneys and tax experts should always be consulted on the subject of trusts.
    Most states allow real estate to be held in trust. Depending on the type of trust and its purpose, the trustor, trustee, and beneficiary can all be either people or legal entities, such as corporations. Trust companies are corporations set up for this specific purpose.

    Living and Testamentary Trusts 
        Property owners may provide for their own financial care or for that of their family by establishing a trust. The trust may be created by agreement during the property owner's lifetime (a living trust) or established by will after the owner's death (a testamentary trust). (Note that neither of these is related to the document called a living will, which deals with the right to refuse medical treatment.)
        The person who creates the trust conveys real or personal property to a trustee (usually a corporate trustee), with the understanding that the trustee will assume certain duties. These duties may include the care and investment of the trust assets to produce an income. After paying the trust's operating expenses and trustee's fees, the income is paid to or used for the benefit of the beneficiary. The trust may continue for the beneficiary's lifetime, or the assets may be distributed when the beneficiary reaches a certain age or when other conditions are met.
        In recent years, living trusts have become a major estate planning tool used to minimize the time and costs of probate. In a living trust, the property owner (trustor, grantor, or settler) transfers ownership of real and personal property to a trustee. The trustee is often the trustor. In this way, the owner continues to control the assets of the trust. The trustee may transfer property into and out of the trust, subject to the trust agreement. Upon the death of the trustee, the property passes to the beneficiary or beneficiaries without the need for probate. In the case of community property, the spouses may transfer real and personal property into a trust and name themselves as joint trustees with rights of survivorship. Upon the death of the surviving trustee, the estate is distributed to the beneficiary or beneficiaries.

    Land trusts 
        Real estate is the only asset of a land trust. As in all trusts, the property is conveyed to a trustee, and the beneficial interest belongs to the beneficiary. In the case of a land trust, however, the beneficiary is usually also the trustor. While the beneficial interest is personal property, the beneficiary retains management and control of the real property and has the right of possession as well as the right to any income produced by the property or proceeds from its sale. Land trusts are frequently created for the conservation of farmland, forests and other wildlife habitats, coastal land, and scenic vistas.
        One of the distinguishing characteristics of a land trust is that the public records usually do not name the beneficiary. A land trust may be used for secrecy when assembling separate parcels. There are other benefits as well. A beneficial interest can be transferred by assignment, making the formalities of a deed unnecessary. The beneficial interest in property can be pledged as security for a loan without having a mortgage recorded. Because the beneficiary's interest is personal, it passes at the beneficiary's death under the laws of the state in which the beneficiary resided. If the deceased owned property in several states, additional probate costs and inheritance taxes can be avoided.
        A land trust ordinarily continues for a definite term, such as 20 years. If the beneficiary does not extend the trust term when it expires, the trustee is usually obligated to sell the real estate and return the net proceeds to the beneficiary.

    Ownership of real estate by business organizations 
        A business organization is a legal entity that exists independently of its members. Ownership by a business organization makes it possible for many people to hold an interest in the same parcel of real estate. Investors may be organized to finance a real estate project in various ways. Some provide for the real estate to be owned by the entity; others provide for direct ownership by the investors.

    Partnership 
        A partnership is an association of two or more persons who carry on a business for profit as co-owners. In a general partnership, all the partners participate in the operation and management of the business and share full liability for business losses and obligations. A limited partnership consists of one or more general partners, as well as limited partners. The business is run by the general partner or partners. The limited partners are not legally permitted to participate, with the result that each can be held liable for business losses only to the amount invested. The limited partnership is a popular method of organizing investors because it permits investors with small amounts of capital to participate in large real estate projects with minimum personal risk.
        If a partner in a general partnership dies, withdraws, or goes bankrupt, the traditional common law result would be to dissolve the partnership, which could be reorganized as a partnership of the surviving partners in order to conduct business. Nearly every state has now adopted the Uniform Partnership Act, which provides for the continuation of the existing business even under these circumstances.
        In a limited partnership, the partnership agreement may provide for the continuation of the organization after the death or withdrawal of one of the partners.

    Corporations 
        A corporation is a legal entity—an artificial person—created under the authority of the laws of the state from which it receives its charter. A corporation is managed and operated by its board of directors, who are selected by the owners of the corporation—its shareholders The members of the board of directors then usually select the officers who are responsible for the day-to-day operation of the corporation. The corporate charter sets forth the powers of the corporation, including its ability to buy and sell real estate (based on a resolution by the board of directors). Because the corporation is a legal entity, it can own real estate in severalty or as a tenant in common with other natural or artificial persons. Some corporations are permitted by their charters to purchase real estate for any purpose; others are limited to purchasing only the land necessary to fulfill the entities' corporate purposes.
        As a legal entity, a corporation continues to exist until it is formally dissolved. The death of one of the officers or directors does not affect title to property owned by the corporation.

    Limited Liability Companies 
        The limited liability company (LLC) is a relatively recent form of business organization in this country, becoming popular only since about 1980, although it has been used in Europe for over a century. An LLC combines the most attractive features of limited partnerships and corporations. The members of an LLC enjoy the limited liability offered by a corporate form of ownership. In addition, the LLC offers the tax advantages of a partnership—income flows directly to the member of the LLC, instead of being subject to the double taxation of a corporation, with income taxed when received by the corporation, and then taxed again when received as dividends by the shareholders. In addition, the LLC offers a flexible management structure without the complicated requirements of a corporation or the restrictions of a limited partnership. The structure and methods of establishing a new LLC, or of converting an existing entity to the LLC form, vary from state to state.

Condominiums, Cooperatives, and Time-Shares 
    Condominium Ownership 
        The condominium form of ownership is used throughout the United States. Condominium laws, often called horizontal property acts, have been enacted in every state. Under these laws, the owner of each unit holds a fee simple title to the unit. The individual unit owners also own a specified share of the undivided interest in the remainder of the building and land, known as common elements. Common elements typically include such items as land, courtyards, lobbies, the exterior structure, hallways, elevators, stairways, and the roof, as well as recreational facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, and golf courses. (See  Condominium Ownership.) Balconies and patios used exclusively by individual units but which must comply with restrictive covenants (such as those regarding use, furnishings, and maintenance) are called limited common elements. Unit owners own the common elements as tenants in common, although state law usually provides that condominium unit owners do not have the same right to partition that other tenants in common have.

        Owning a condominium 
            Once a property is established as a condominium, each unit becomes a separate parcel of real estate that is owned in fee simple and may be held by one or more persons in any type of ownership or tenancy recognized by state law. A condominium unit may be mortgaged like any other parcel of real estate, although the condominium project will be required to meet lender requirements. The unit can usually be sold or transferred to whomever the owner chooses, unless the condominium association provides for a right of first refusal. In that case, the owner is required to offer the unit at the same price to the other owners in the condominium or the association before accepting an outside purchase offer.
            Real estate taxes are assessed and collected on each unit as an individual property. Default in the payment of taxes or a mortgage loan by one unit owner may result in a foreclosure sale of that owner's unit. An owner's default, however, does not affect the other unit owners.
                In Practice
                   Before buying a condominium, the buyer should do as much background research as possible. Consideration of association fees and rules is critical to understanding all the ramifications of condominium ownership.

        Operation and Administration 
           The condominium property is administered by a homeowners association (HOA), which is made up of unit owners. The association may be governed by a board of directors or another elected entity, and it may manage the property on its own or hire a property manager.
            The association must enforce any rules it adopts regarding the operation and use of the property. The association is responsible for the maintenance, repair, cleaning, and sanitation of the common elements and structural portions of the property. It must also maintain fire, extended-coverage, and liability insurance.
            The expenses of maintaining and operating the condominium building are paid by the unit owners in the form of fees and assessments. Both fees and assessments are imposed and collected by the homeowners association. Recurring fees (called HOA fees) are paid by each unit owner. The fees may be due monthly, quarterly, semiannually, or annually, depending on the provisions of the bylaws. If fees are not paid, the association may seek a court-ordered judgment to have the delinquent owner's unit sold to cover the outstanding amount or place a lien on the property. In some states, the association can pursue a foreclosure without first obtaining a court order.
            Assessments are special payments required of unit owners to address some specific expense, such as a new roof. Assessments are structured like condo fees: Owners of larger units pay proportionately higher assessments than smaller units. The relative ownership shares are established by the developer prior to the sale of the units. 

    Cooperative Ownership 
        In a cooperative, a corporation holds title to the land and the building. The corporation then offers shares of stock to prospective tenants. The price the corporation sets for each apartment becomes the price of the stock. The purchaser becomes a shareholder in the corporation by virtue of stock ownership and receives a proprietary lease to the apartment for the life of the corporation. Because stock is personal property, the cooperative tenant-owners do not own real estate, as is the case with condominiums. Instead, they own an interest in a corporation that has only one asset: the building.

    Operation and Management 
        The operation and management of a cooperative are determined by the corporation's bylaws. Through their control of the corporation, the shareholders of a cooperative control the property and its operation. They elect officers and directors who are responsible for operating the corporation and its real estate assets. Individual shareholders are obligated to abide by the corporation's bylaws.
        An important issue in most cooperatives is the method by which shares in the corporation may be transferred to new owners. For instance, the bylaws may require that the board of directors approve any prospective shareholders. In some cooperatives, a tenant-owner must sell the stock back to the corporation at the original purchase price so that the corporation realizes any profits when the shares are resold.
            In Practice
                In often publicized events, a well-known celebrity attempts to purchase a unit in a cooperative apartment building and is blocked by the cooperative's board. In refusing to allow a celebrity to purchase shares, the board may cite the unwanted publicity and media attention other tenants might suffer.
        Unlike a condominium association, which has the authority to impose a lien on the title owned by someone who defaults on maintenance payments, the burden of any defaulted payment in a cooperative falls on the remaining shareholders. Each shareholder is affected by the financial ability of the others. For this reason, approval of prospective tenants by the board of directors will include financial evaluation. If the corporation is unable to make mortgage and tax payments because of shareholder defaults, the property might be sold by court order in a foreclosure suit. This would destroy the interests of all shareholders, including those who have paid their assessments.

        Advantages 
            Cooperative ownership, despite its risks, has become more desirable in recent years for several reasons. Lending institutions view the shares of stock as acceptable collateral for financing and the availability of financing expands the transferability of shares beyond wealthy cash buyers. As a tenant-owner, rather than a tenant who pays rent to a landlord, the shareholder has some control over the property. Tenants in cooperatives also enjoy certain income tax advantages. The IRS treats ownership of a cooperative as it does a fee simple interest in a single-family home or condominium in regard to deductibility of loan interest and property taxes, and homesellers' tax exclusions. Finally, owners enjoy freedom from maintenance chores.
                In Practice
                    The laws in some states may prohibit real estate professionals or brokerages from listing or selling cooperative interests because the owners own only personal property. Individuals who participate in these transactions may need a securities license appropriate for the type of cooperative interest involved.

    Time-share ownership 
        Time-share ownership permits multiple purchasers to buy relatively small interests in real estate, typically resort properties. Each purchaser receives the right to occupy the facilities for a certain period. A time-share estate includes a real property interest in a specified unit for a particular period of the year, or it can be a designated share of ownership of the property expressed as a fractional interest or number of points. A time-share use is a contract right under which the developer owns the real estate. The owner of the time-share use has the right to occupy the facilities for the designated period each year, but only for a certain number of years. At the end of that time, the owner's rights in the property terminate.
        The right to transfer the period of occupancy—or even exchange the period of use between properties that are part of the same exchange organization—can make time-share ownership attractive. High development and marketing costs have made time-shares an expensive form of property ownership, however, as evidenced by the discounts offered for resales of time-share interests on various internet sites. Maintenance costs are an ongoing expense, even if the time-share is not used in a given year.
        Membership camping may be offered in a form similar to a time-share use. The owner purchases the right to use the developer's facilities, which usually consist of an open area with minimal improvements (such as camper and trailer hookups and restrooms). Normally, the owner is not limited to a specific time for using the property; use is limited only by weather and access.
            In Practice
                The laws governing the development and sale of time-share units are complex and vary substantially from state to state. In addition, the sale of time-share properties may be subject to federal securities laws, as well as a state's real estate commission oversight. In many states, time-share properties are now subject to subdivision requirements. Several states have adopted versions of the Model Real Estate Time-Share Act, drafted by the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws; a summary of the model act is available at www.uniformlaws.org. The model act contains provisions for the management and termination of time-share units and also provides consumer protections for purchasers of time-shares.















