Preclosing Procedures 
    Closing involves two major events. First, the promises made in the sales contract are fulfilled; second, the mortgage funds are distributed to the buyer. Before the property changes hands, however, each party—buyer and seller—usually will have specific concerns that must be addressed. As emphasized previously, the closing process is based on the provisions of the sales contract, making it important that the parties treat the negotiation for the purchase of the property—the process of offer and acceptance—very seriously.
    Many real estate professionals maintain a list of events that must take place prior to the actual closing in order to avoid surprises that might lead to delays.

    Buyer's Concerns 
        Both the buyer and the buyer's lender must be sure that the seller can deliver the title that was promised in the purchase agreement and that the property is now in essentially the same condition it was in when the buyer and the seller agreed to the sale. A home inspection will alert the buyer to any issues that were not immediately apparent when the buyer viewed the property, as well as problems with mechanical systems that an inspection may reveal.
        The buyer's concerns thus involve examination of examination of
            the results of any inspections, such as termite, radon, water and septic systems, structural inspections, or required repairs;
            the survey;
            the title evidence, including the seller's deed and any documents demonstrating the removal of undesired liens and encumbrances; and
            any lease, if a tenant resides on the premises.
        A thorough inspection of the property by a professional home inspector, who may have to be licensed by the state, may allay many of the buyer's concerns, or identify problems to be resolved. 
            
    Final Property Inspection 
        In the real estate contract, the buyer usually reserves the right to make a final inspection, often called a walk-through, shortly before the closing takes place. The buyer, accompanied by the real estate professional, verifies that necessary repairs have been made, that the property has been well maintained, that all fixtures are in place, and that no unauthorized removal or alteration of any part of the improvements has taken place. It is not a time to reopen negotiations, but to verify that the condition of the property is in compliance with the terms of the contract.

    Survey 
        A survey provides information about the exact location and size of the property. Typically, the survey indicates the location of all buildings, driveways, fences, and other improvements located on the premises. The survey should also indicate any existing easements and encroachments. The cost of the survey is negotiated in the sales contract. The survey is important in verifying the legal description of the property.
            In Practice
                Relying on an old survey is not a good idea; the property should be resurveyed prior to closing, even in the rare instance that it is not required by the title company or lender. A current survey confirms that the property purchased is exactly what the buyer wants and that no encroachments have arisen since the last transfer of title.

    Title Evidence 
        The buyer and the buyer's lender will require that the seller's title comply with the terms of the real estate contract. Although practices vary from state to state, most require that the seller produce a current abstract of title or title commitment from a title insurance company. When an abstract of title is used, the purchaser's attorney examines it and issues an opinion of title. The attorney's opinion of title is a statement of the quality of the seller's title, and it lists all liens, encumbrances, easements, conditions, and restrictions that appear in the record and to which the seller's title is subject. The attorney's opinion is not a guarantee of title. You previously learned about how ownership is proven and the importance of examining the chain of title for various defects.
        When the purchaser pays cash or obtains a new loan to purchase the property, the seller's existing loan is paid in full and satisfied on the record. The exact amount required to pay the existing loan is provided in a current payoff statement from the lender, effective the date of closing. The payoff statement notes the unpaid amount of principal, the interest due through the date of the proposed payment, the fee for issuing the certificate of satisfaction or release deed, credits to the seller (if any) for tax and insurance reserves, and the amount of any prepayment penalty. The same procedure is followed for any other liens, such as a second mortgage or home equity loan, that must be released before the buyer takes title.
        If the buyer assumes the seller's existing mortgage loan, the buyer needs to know the exact balance of the loan as of the closing date. Usually, the lender is required to provide the buyer with a mortgage reduction certificate, which certifies the amount owed on the mortgage loan, the interest rate, and the date and amount of the last interest payment.
        The closing agent examines the title commitment or the abstract that was issued several days or weeks before the closing. Because liens may have been filed during the interval, two searches of the public record are often made. The first search shows the status of the seller's title on that date. The second search, known as a bring down, is made after the closing and before any new documents are filed.
        As part of the later search, the seller may be required to execute an affidavit of title, a sworn statement in which the seller assures the title insurance company (and the buyer) that no other defects in the title have occurred since the date of the title examination (e.g., judgments, bankruptcies, divorce, unrecorded deeds or contracts, unpaid repairs or improvements that might lead to mechanics' liens). The affidavit gives the title insurance company a basis on which to sue the seller should the statements in the affidavit be incorrect.
        In areas in which real estate sales transactions are customarily closed through an escrow, the escrow instructions usually provide for an extended coverage policy to be issued to the buyer effective the date of closing. The seller then has no need to execute an affidavit of title.
            In Practice
                Real estate professionals often assist in preclosing arrangements as part of their service to customers. In some states, real estate professionals are required to advise the parties of the approximate expenses involved in closing when a real estate sales contract is signed. In other states, real estate professionals have a statutory duty to coordinate and supervise closing activities. Aside from state laws on this issue, a real estate professional without a specific role in the closing may still be the person with the greatest knowledge of the details of the transaction. Because of this, many real estate professionals feel it is part of their fiduciary duty to be present at a face-to-face closing.


    Seller's Concerns 
        The seller's main interest is to receive payment for the property, so the seller will want assurance that the buyer has obtained the necessary financing and will have sufficient funds to complete the sale. In turn, the seller may have a list of tasks required by the purchase agreement to complete. Unless the seller owns the property free and clear of any mortgage debt, there must also be a payoff statement from the seller's lender(s), noting the amount owed that will be paid out of the sale proceeds. Both parties, along with their attorneys or real estate professionals, will want to inspect the disclosure statement made prior to closing to make sure that all monies involved in the transaction have been accounted for properly.

    Real Estate Professional's Role At Closing 
        Depending on local practice, the real estate professional's role at closing can vary from simply collecting the commission to conducting the proceedings. In the states that require an attorney's participation, a real estate professional's responsibility is essentially finished as soon as the real estate contract is signed. Even so, most real estate professionals continue to be involved all the way through closing on behalf of their clients because it is also in a real estate professional's best interest that the transaction moves successfully and smoothly to a conclusion. This may mean actively arranging for title evidence, surveys, appraisals, and inspections or repairs related to structural conditions, water supplies, sewage facilities, or toxic substances.
        Although real estate professionals do not always conduct closing proceedings, they usually attend. Often, the parties look to their real estate professionals for guidance, assistance, and information during what can be a stressful experience. Real estate professionals must be thoroughly familiar with the procedures involved in preparing the disclosure statement provided prior to closing, including the proration of costs involved in closing the transaction, which will be discussed later.
            In Practice
                Even in a state that does not require an attorney at closing, the real estate professional should never discourage the seller's or the buyer's use of an attorney, before and/or at closing. The real estate professional can, however, provide guidance on the importance of selecting a competent, experienced real estate attorney. The attorney must be knowledgeable about real estate documents and closing practices in order for the transaction to close smoothly.

    Lender's Interest in Closing
        Whether a buyer obtains new financing or assumes the seller's existing loan, the lender wants to protect its security interest in the property and ensure that its mortgage lien has priority over other liens. The lender may require a survey, a pest control or another inspection report, or a certificate of occupancy (for a newly constructed building). In order to ensure that the buyer takes good and marketable title at closing, lenders generally require that the buyer obtain a mortgagee's title insurance policy.
        The buyer must also provide a fire and hazard insurance policy (along with a receipt for the premium). Usually, the homeowners insurance policy the buyer purchases combines the required hazard insurance on the structure, as well as insurance on the buyer's personal property.
        The lender typically will request that a reserve account be established for tax and insurance payments so that the buyer sets aside funds for these large expenses of homeownership. The lender may even require representation by its own attorney at closing.

    Internal Revenue Service Reporting Requirements
        Certain real estate closings must be reported to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) on Form 1099-S. The affected properties include a sale or exchange of
            land (improved or unimproved), including air space;
            an inherently permanent structure, including any residential, commercial, or industrial building;
            a condominium unit and its appurtenant fixtures and common elements (including land); or
            shares in a cooperative housing corporation.
        Information to be reported includes the sales price, the amount of property tax reimbursement credited to the seller, and the seller's Social Security number. If the closing agent does not notify the IRS, the responsibility for filing the form falls on the mortgage lender, although the real estate professionals or the parties to the transaction ultimately could be held liable.


Conducting the Closing 
    Closing is known by different names in different areas. In some areas, for instance, closing is called settlement and transfer. The closing process also takes different forms, depending on state law, local custom, or the convenience of the parties. In some parts of the country, the parties to a transaction sit around a table and exchange copies of documents as they are executed, a process known as passing papers. ("We passed papers on the new house Wednesday morning.") In other regions, the buyer and the seller never meet; the paperwork is handled by an escrow agent in a process known as closing escrow. ("We'll close escrow on our house next week.") The main concerns are always that the buyer receive marketable title and the seller receive the purchase price.
        
    Face-to-Face Closing 
        A face-to-face closing may be held at the office of the title company, the lending institution, an attorney for one of the parties, the real estate professional, the county recorder, or the escrow company. In many cases, this is the first and only time the buyer and the seller will meet. Those attending a closing may include
            the buyer;
            the seller;
            the real estate professionals (both the buyer's and the seller's representatives);
            the seller's and the buyer's attorneys;
            a representative of the lending institution involved with the buyer's new mortgage loan, the buyer's assumption of the seller's existing loan, or the seller's payoff of an existing loan; and
            a representative of the title insurance company.

    Closing agent or closing officer 
        The closing agent may be a representative of the title company or lender, the real estate professional representing one of the parties, or the buyer's or the seller's attorney. Some title companies and law firms employ paralegal assistants who conduct closings for their firms.
        The closing agent orders and reviews the title insurance policy or title certificate, survey, property insurance policy, and other items. After the sales contract is reviewed, the disclosure statement that indicates the division of income and expenses between the parties is prepared. Finally, the time and place of closing is arranged.

    The Exchange 
        The exchange is made when the parties are satisfied that everything is in order. After the buyer and the seller have signed all the necessary paperwork, the seller delivers the signed deed to the buyer, who accepts it. All pertinent documents are then recorded in the correct order to ensure continuity of title. For instance, if the seller pays off an existing loan and the buyer obtains a new loan, the seller's satisfaction of mortgage must be recorded before the seller's deed to the buyer. Because the buyer cannot pledge the property as security for the new loan until ownership has been transferred, the buyer's new mortgage or deed of trust is recorded only after the seller's deed to the buyer is recorded.
            In Practice 
                A face-to-face or roundtable closing can be challenging and may not be the best approach to use if there has been friction between buyer and seller leading up to the closing. In addition, there may be a confidentiality or privacy concern in having all parties present to hear all discussions, questions asked, or concerns raised. Having the closing agent ferry documents between separate rooms in which each of the parties and their representatives are sequestered may be the best way to avoid any risk of conflict at such a stressful moment.

    Closing in escrow 
        In an escrow closing, a disinterested third party is authorized to act as escrow agent, or escrow holder, and coordinate the closing activities. The selection of the escrow agent is determined by negotiation, custom, or state law. The escrow agent may be an attorney, a title company, a trust company, an escrow company, or the escrow department of a lending institution. Although a few states do not permit certain transactions to be closed in escrow, escrow closings are used to some extent in most states.

    Escrow Procedure 
        After the sales contract is signed, the buyer and seller execute escrow instructions to the escrow agent. Once the escrow instructions are received by the escrow agent, they can be changed only at the written direction of both buyer and seller. The real estate professional who is holding the earnest money turns it over to the escrow agent, who deposits it in a special trust, or escrow, account.
        The buyer and the seller deposit all pertinent documents and other items with the escrow agent before the specified date of closing.
        The seller deposits
            the deed conveying the property to the buyer;
            title evidence (abstract and attorney's opinion of title, certificate of title, title insurance, or Torrens certificate);
            existing hazard insurance policies;
            a letter or mortgage reduction certificate from the lender stating the exact principal remaining (if the buyer is assuming the seller's loan);
            affidavits of title (if required);
            a payoff statement (if the seller's loan is to be paid off); and
            other instruments or documents necessary to clear the title or to complete the transaction.
        The buyer deposits
            the balance of the cash needed to complete the purchase, usually in the form of a certified check;
            loan documents (if the buyer secures a new loan);
            proof of hazard insurance, including (where required) flood insurance; and
            other necessary documents, such as inspection reports required by the lender.
        The escrow agent has the authority to examine the title evidence. When marketable title is shown in the name of the buyer, all other conditions of the escrow agreement have been met, and the parties have received the disclosure statement, the agent is authorized to disburse the purchase price to the seller, minus all charges and expenses. The agent then records the deed and, if a new loan has been obtained by the buyer, the mortgage or deed of trust.
        If the escrow agent's examination of the title discloses liens, a portion of the purchase price can be withheld from the seller. The withheld portion is used to pay the liens to clear the title.
        If the seller cannot clear the title, or if for any reason the sale cannot be consummated, the escrow instructions usually provide that the parties be returned to their former status, as if no sale occurred. The escrow agent returns the documents of title to the seller and returns the purchase money to the buyer.

Legislation Related To Closing
    The Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA) is a federal law that requires certain disclosures about the mortgage and settlement process and prohibits certain practices that increase the cost of settlement services, such as kickbacks and referral fees. The Mortgage Disclosure Improvement Act (MDIA) has changed how buyers, sellers, lenders, mortgage brokers, title agents, and real estate professionals prepare for a closing. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) issued the TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure rule (TRID) to implement provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act intended to combine and clarify financing disclosures to consumers. This rule applies to transactions originating on or after October 3, 2015.    

    Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA)
        RESPA regulations apply to a first-lien residential mortgage loan made to finance the purchase of a one- to four-family home, cooperative, or condominium, for either investment or occupancy, as well as second or subordinate liens for home equity loans when a purchase is financed by a federally related mortgage loan. A federally related loan is one made by a bank, savings association, or other lender whose deposits are insured by a federal agency; a loan insured by the FHA or guaranteed by the VA; a loan administered by HUD; and a loan intended to be sold by the lender to Fannie Mae, Ginnie Mae, or Freddie Mac. RESPA is administered by HUD.
        RESPA does not apply to the following:
            Loans on large properties (i.e., more than 25 acres)
            Loans for business or agricultural purposes
            Construction loans or other temporary financing
            Vacant land (unless a dwelling will be placed on the property within two years)
            A transaction financed solely by a purchase-money mortgage taken back by the seller
            An installment contract (contract for deed)
            A buyer's assumption of a seller's existing loan—but if the terms of the assumed loan are modified, or if the lender charges more than $50 for the assumption, the transaction is subject to RESPA regulations
        RESPA prohibits certain practices that increase the cost of settlement services:
            Section 8 prohibits kickbacks and fee-splitting for referrals of settlement services, and unearned fees for services not actually performed. Violators are subject to criminal and civil penalties, including a fine up to $10,000 and/or imprisonment up to one year. The consumer may privately pursue a violator in court; the violator may be liable for an amount up to three times the amount of the charge paid for the service.
            Section 9 prohibits the home seller from requiring that the buyer purchase title insurance from a particular company. The buyer may sue the seller for such a violation; the violator is liable for up to three times the amount paid for the title insurance.
            Section 10 prohibits the lender from requiring excessive escrow account deposits for such items as taxes and hazard insurance.

    Affiliated Business Arrangement (ABA)
        To streamline the settlement process, a real estate firm, title insurance company, mortgage broker, home inspection company, or even a moving company may agree to offer a package of services to consumers, a system known as an affiliated business arrangement (ABA). RESPA permits an ABA between a real estate brokerage and a mortgage company or other settlement service provider when
            there is a 1% or more common ownership between the companies, as long as the consumer is clearly informed of the relationship among the service providers,
            participation is not required,
            other providers are available, and
            the only thing of value received from the arrangement, in addition to permitted payments for services provided, is a return on the ownership interest.
        Fees must be reasonably related to the value of the services provided and must not be fees exchanged among the affiliated companies simply for referring business to one another.

    Other RESPA Requirements
        RESPA prohibits the lender from requiring the borrower to deposit funds in an escrow account for taxes and insurance that exceed certain limits, thus preventing the lender from taking advantage of the borrower. While RESPA does not require that an escrow account be set up, certain government loan programs and some lenders require that an escrow account be established as a condition of a loan. RESPA places limits on the amount that a lender may require: on a monthly basis, the lender may require only one-twelfth of the total of the disbursements for the year, plus an amount necessary to cover a shortage in the account. No more than one-sixth of the year's total disbursements may be held as a cushion (a cushion is not required). Once a year, the lender must perform an escrow account analysis and return any amount over $50 to the borrower.
        
        Mortgage Servicing Transfer Statement
            A mortgage servicing transfer statement is required if the lender intends to sell or assign the right to service the loan to another loan servicer. The loan servicer must notify the borrower 15 days before the effective date of the loan transfer, including in the notice the name and address of the new servicer, toll-free telephone numbers, and the date the new servicer will begin accepting payments. If the borrower makes a timely payment to the old servicer within 60 days of the loan transfer, the borrower cannot be penalized.

    TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure Rule 
        The TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure Rule (TRID), (also called the "Know Before You Owe" mortgage disclosure rule or TRID) replaces the four previous disclosure forms with two new forms: the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) prepared these forms to make it easier for consumers to understand the costs involved in closing. The new forms were required for transactions originating on or after October 3, 2015. The forms apply to most consumer mortgage transactions, but not to home equity lines of credit, reverse mortgages, or mortgages secured by a mobile home or a dwelling that is not attached to land. The forms also do not apply to a creditor who makes five or fewer mortgages in a year. Although the burden of implementing these reforms is the responsibility of the lender, real estate professionals should be aware of current requirements because failure to meet the standards can and will delay closings.
    
    Loan Estimate Form
        The Loan Estimate (LE) form replaces the initial Truth in Lending Statement (TIL) and the Good Faith Estimate (GFE). This form highlights the information that historically has been the most important to consumers. Interest rate, monthly payment, and total closing costs are clearly presented on the first page. The Loan Estimate form must be provided to the consumer three business days after a loan application is submitted to the lender. The Loan Estimate must contain the exact language specified by the CFPB, making it easier for borrowers to compare loan conditions from one lender to another.

        The only fee that the lender may collect before the loan applicant receives the Loan Estimate is the fee for a credit report. Once the Loan Estimate is issued, the lender is committed to making the loan on the indicated terms and may only modify the Loan Estimate in certain specific instances. If certain information or circumstances change after the original Loan Estimate is issued, a new Loan Estimate must be issued.
        Some closing costs or fees may or may not change prior to settlement.
        The fees are divided into three categories:
            No tolerance—fees that may not increase before closing: lender charges for taking, underwriting, and processing the loan application, including points, origination fee, and yield spread premium
            10% tolerance—fees that cannot increase by more than 10% in any given category: settlement services for which the lender selects the provider or for which the borrower selects the provider from the lender's list, title services and title insurance if the lender selects the provider, and recording fees
            Unlimited tolerance—fees for services that are out of the lender's control: services for which the borrower chooses the provider (such as escrow and title insurance), impounds for taxes, mortgage interest, and the cost of homeowners insurance
        The last page of the Loan Estimate is a summary of the loan terms that the consumer can use to compare different loans and terms to aid in price shopping. The lender is responsible for the accuracy of the Loan Estimate as well as the actual costs that the lender charges, which are shown on the Closing Disclosure form.
        Additional sample forms can be found at http://www.consumerfinance.gov/regulatory-implementation/tila-respa/.

    Closing Disclosure Form 
        The Closing Disclosure form itemizes all charges that are normally paid by a borrower and a seller in connection with settlement, whether required by the lender or another party, or paid by the lender or any other person. The Closing Disclosure form replaces the HUD-1 Settlement Statement and the final TIL. The form provides more information about the costs of taxes and insurance and how the interest rate and payments may change in the future. It also warns consumers about things they may want to avoid such as prepayment penalties. The borrower must receive a completed Closing Disclosure at least three business days before the closing. If a new Closing Disclosure is required because a creditor has made a significant change to the loan terms (such as an increase in the APR greater than 0.125%, a different loan product, or the addition of a prepayment penalty), a new three-day waiting period begins.

    Your Home Loan Toolkit 
        The CFPB developed an information booklet called Your Home Loan Toolkit, which must be provided by a creditor to a mortgage applicant as part of the loan application process, although other real estate professionals, such as brokers, are encouraged to make the booklet available to prospective borrowers. The booklet provides the borrower with general information about settlement (closing) and how to find the best mortgage. It provides numerous resources for further information, as well as a line-by-line description of the Loan Disclosure form. More information on Your Home Loan Toolkit is available from the CFPB by going to www.consumerfinance.gov. As of October 3, 2015, Your Home Loan Toolkit replaced the previously mandated Settlement Cost Booklet.

    Kickbacks and Referral Fees 
        RESPA prohibits the payment of kickbacks, or unearned fees, in any real estate settlement service.
        It prohibits a referral fee when no services are actually rendered. The payment or receipt of a fee, a kickback, or anything of value for a referral for settlement services includes activities such as mortgage loans, title searches, title insurance, attorney services, surveys, credit reports, and appraisals.
            In Practice
                Although RESPA's requirements are aimed primarily at lenders, real estate professionals fall under RESPA when they refer buyers to particular lenders, title companies, attorneys, or other providers of settlement services. Real estate professionals who offer computerized loan origination are also subject to regulation. Remember: Buyers have the right to select their own providers of settlement services.

    Mortgage Disclosure Improvement Act
        The Mortgage Disclosure Improvement Act (MDIA), which took effect July 31, 2009, changed how buyers and sellers, lenders, mortgage brokers, title agents, and real estate professionals prepare for a closing. The intent of this law is to prevent the consumer from receiving an enticingly low interest rate at the initial loan application and then learning at settlement that the lender is charging more in fees.
        The requirements of the MDIA are now incorporated into the CFPB disclosure requirements. Until the applicant/borrower receives the Loan Estimate, the lender may collect only a reasonable fee for accessing the applicant's credit history. In addition, the lender must provide a statement to the loan applicant indicating that the applicant is not obligated to complete the transaction simply because disclosures were provided or because the individual applied for a loan. Generally, if the APR increases more than 0.125% from that stated in the Closing Disclosure, the creditor must provide a new disclosure with a revised APR and wait an additional three business days before closing the loan. The consumer is permitted to accelerate the process if a personal emergency, such as a foreclosure, exists.
        Before closing, everyone involved in the real estate transaction should check and double-check that the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure forms are consistent with the original application.

Preparation of Closing Statements 
    A typical real estate transaction requires accounting for the expenses incurred by either party, generally on the Closing Disclosure, which is required for any federally related closing. All expenses must be itemized to arrive at the exact amount of cash required from the buyer and the net proceeds that will be paid to the seller. These include prorated items—those prepaid by the seller for which the seller must be reimbursed (such as taxes) and expenses the seller has incurred but for which the buyer will be billed (such as mortgage interest paid in arrears when a loan is assumed).

    How the closing statement works
        The closing statement is an accounting of the parties' debits and credits. A debit is a charge—an amount that a party owes and must pay at closing. A credit is an amount entered in a person's favor—an amount that has already been paid, an amount being reimbursed, or an amount the buyer promises to pay in the form of a loan.
        To determine the amount a buyer must bring to closing, any buyer expenses and prorated amounts for items prepaid by the seller are added to the purchase price. Then the buyer's credits are totaled. Credits to the buyer include the earnest money (already paid), the balance of the loan the buyer obtains or assumes, and the seller's share of any prorated items the buyer will pay in the future.
        Finally, the total of the buyer's credits is subtracted from the total of the buyer's debits to arrive at the actual amount of cash the buyer must bring to closing. The buyer usually brings a cashier's or certified check.
        A similar procedure is followed to determine the net proceeds to the seller. The seller's debits are subtracted from the seller's credits. Seller credits include the purchase price plus the buyer's share of any prorated items that the seller has prepaid. The seller's debits include expenses to be paid by the seller, the seller's share of prorated items to be paid by the buyer, and the balance of any mortgage loan or other lien that the seller must satisfy. (See  Credits and Debits.)

    Broker's commission
        The responsibility for paying a real estate broker's commission will have been determined by previous agreement. If the broker represents the seller, the seller is normally responsible for paying the commission. If a representation agreement exists between a broker and the buyer or if two representatives are involved, one for the seller and one for the buyer, the commission may be distributed as an expense between both parties or according to some other arrangement.

    Attorney's Fees
        If either of the parties' attorneys will be paid from the closing proceeds, that party will be charged with the expense in the closing statement. This expense may include fees for the preparation or review of documents or for representing the parties at settlement.

    Recording Expenses 
        The seller usually pays for any recording charges (filing fees) necessary to clear all defects and furnish the purchaser with a marketable title. Items customarily charged to the seller include the recording of any release deed or satisfaction of mortgage, quitclaim deed, affidavit, or satisfaction of a mechanic's lien. The buyer pays for recording charges that arise from the actual transfer of title. Usually, such items include the recording of the deed that conveys title to the purchaser and a mortgage or deed of trust executed by the buyer for the benefit of the lender.

    Transfer Tax 
        Most states, counties, and local municipalities require some form of transfer tax, conveyance fee, or tax stamps on real estate conveyances. Responsibility for this charge varies according to local practice and the terms of the sales contract.

    Title Expenses 
        Responsibility for title expenses varies according to local custom. In most areas, the seller is required to furnish evidence of good title and pay for the title search. If the buyer's attorney inspects the evidence or if the buyer purchases title insurance policies, the buyer is charged for the expense.

    Loan Fees 
        For a new loan, the lender generally charges an origination fee and could possibly charge discount points, particularly if the borrower wants a below-market interest rate.

    Tax reserves and insurance reserves (escrow or impound accounts)
        Most mortgage lenders require that borrowers provide funds to pay future real estate taxes and insurance premiums. These funds are held in an escrow account or impound account. A borrower starts the account at closing by depositing funds to cover at least the amount of unpaid real estate taxes from the date of the lien to the end of the current month. (The buyer receives a credit from the seller at closing for any unpaid taxes.) Afterward, an amount equal to one month's portion of the estimated taxes is included in the borrower's monthly mortgage payment.
        The borrower is responsible for maintaining adequate property insurance as a condition of the mortgage loan. The first year's premium is paid in full at closing if it has not been paid earlier by the buyer, effective on the date of closing. The borrower's monthly loan payment typically will include principal and interest on the loan (unless the payment is interest-only), plus one-twelfth of the estimated taxes and insurance (PITI) that will be owed at the end of the coming year. The taxes and insurance are held by the lender in an escrow account until the bills are due.
            In Practice
                RESPA permits lenders to maintain a cushion equal to one-sixth of the total estimated amount of annual taxes and insurance. However, if state law or mortgage documents allow for a smaller cushion, the lesser amount prevails.

    Appraisal fee
        Either the seller or the purchaser pays the appraisal fee, depending on who orders the appraisal. When the buyer obtains a mortgage, it is customary for the lender to require an appraisal, in which case, the buyer usually bears the cost, although this is always a negotiable item. If the fee is paid at the time of the loan application, it is reflected on the closing statement as having been paid before closing.

    Survey fee 
        The purchaser who obtains new mortgage financing customarily pays a survey fee. The sales contract may require that the seller furnish a survey.

    Additional fees 
        If the borrower's loan is insured by FHA, the borrower owes a lump sum for payment of the mortgage insurance premium (MIP) if it is not financed as part of the loan. The borrower of a VA-guaranteed loan pays a funding fee directly to the Department of Veterans Affairs at closing. If a conventional loan carries private mortgage insurance (PMI), the buyer prepays one year's mortgage insurance premium at closing.

Accounting for expenses
    - Expenses paid out of the closing proceeds are debited only to the party making the payment. Occasionally, an expense item (e.g., an escrow fee, a settlement fee, or a transfer tax) may be shared by the buyer and the seller. In that case, each party is debited for that individual's share of the expense.

    Extra Notes
    - A debit on a closing statement is an amount for which the party is liable.

    - RESPA permits a cushion in an escrow account of no more than one-sixth of the year's total disbursements to be held by the lender, but does not require a cushion.

Prorations 
    - Most closings involve the division of financial responsibility between the buyer and the seller for such items as loan interest, taxes, rents, fuel, and utility bills. These allowances are allocated between the parties in the required proportions, or prorations. Prorations are necessary to ensure that expenses and credits are divided fairly between the seller and the buyer.

    General rules for prorating
    - The rules or customs governing the computation of prorations for the closing of a real estate sale vary widely from state to state. The following are some general guidelines for preparing the closing statement:
        • In most states, the seller owns the property on the day of closing, and prorations or apportionments are usually made up to and including the day of closing. A few states specify that the buyer owns the property on the closing date. In that case, adjustments are made as of the day preceding the day on which title is closed.
        • Mortgage interest, general real estate taxes, water taxes, insurance premiums, and similar expenses are usually computed by using 360 days in a year and 30 days in a month. In some areas, however, prorations are computed on the basis of the actual number of days in the calendar month of closing. The agreement of sale should specify which method will be used.
        • On almost every mortgage loan, the interest is paid in arrears. A mortgage payment due on June 1, for example, includes interest due for May. The buyer who places a new mortgage loan on May 31 may be pleasantly surprised to learn that the first mortgage payment is not due for another month.
        • Accrued or prepaid general real estate taxes are usually prorated at the closing. In some states, real estate taxes are paid in advance; that is, if the tax year runs from January 1 to December 31, taxes for the coming year are due on January 1. In this case, the seller, who has prepaid a year's taxes, should be reimbursed for the portion of the year remaining after the buyer takes ownership of the property. In other areas, taxes are paid in arrears, on December 31 for the year just ended. In that case, the buyer should be credited by the seller for the time the seller occupied the property. When the amount of the current real estate tax cannot be determined definitely, the proration is usually based on the last obtainable tax bill, often with a percentage increase—say, 10%—to account for a likely reassessment.
        • Special assessments for municipal improvements such as sewers, water mains, or streets are usually paid in annual installments over several years, with annual interest charged on the outstanding balance of future payments. The seller normally makes the current payments, and the buyer assumes all future payments. The special assessment installment generally is not prorated at the closing. A buyer may insist that the seller allow the buyer a credit for the seller's share of the interest to the closing date. The agreement of sale may address the manner in which special assessments will be handled at closing.
        • Rent is usually adjusted on the basis of the actual number of days in the month of closing. The seller customarily receives the rents for the day of closing and pays all expenses for that day. If any rents for the current month are uncollected when the sale is closed, the buyer often agrees by a separate letter to collect the rents, if possible, and remit the prorated share to the seller.
        • A security deposit made by a tenant to cover the cost of repairing damage caused by the tenant, or the last month's rent which has been collected in advance, are generally transferred by the seller to the buyer without prorating. The only exception would be if the property were being transferred in the last month of the lease; thus, the last month's rent would be prorated.

    - Accrued items are expenses to be prorated (such as water bills and interest on an assumed mortgage) that are owed by the seller but will be paid after the sale by the buyer. The seller pays for these items by giving the buyer credits for them at closing.

    - Prepaid items are expenses to be prorated (such as fuel oil in a tank) that have been prepaid by the seller but not fully used up, so they become credits to the seller.

    The Arithmetic of Prorating
    - The computation of a proration involves identifying a yearly charge for the item to be prorated, then dividing by 12 to determine a monthly charge for the item. Also, it is usually necessary to identify a daily charge for the item by dividing the monthly charge by the number of days in the month. These smaller portions are then multiplied by the number of months or days in the prorated period to determine the accrued or unearned amount that will be figured in the settlement.

    - Using this general principle, there are two methods of calculating a proration:
        • The yearly charge is divided by a 360-day year (called a banking or statutory year), or 12 months of 30 days each.
        • The yearly charge is divided by 365 (a calendar year) to determine the daily charge, and the actual number of days in the proration period is determined, with this number multiplied by the daily charge.

    - The final proration figure will vary slightly, depending on which computation method is used. The final figure also will vary according to the number of decimal places to which the division is carried. All the proration calculations here are computed by carrying the division to three decimal places and then rounding to the nearest cent only after the final proration figure is determined.

    Accrued Items
    - When the real estate tax is levied for the calendar year and is payable during that year or in the following year, the accrued portion is for the period from January 1 to the date of closing (or to the day before the closing in states where the sale date is excluded). If the current tax bill has not yet been issued, the parties must agree on an estimated amount based on the previous year's bill and any known changes in assessment or tax levy for the current year. If the assessment for the current year is not known, the parties may agree to add an estimated amount, say 10%, to the amount of the last assessment.

    Sample Proration Calculator
    - Assume that a sale is to be closed on September 17. Using a 360-day year, prorate the current real estate taxes of $3,600 for the accrued period of 8 months, 17 days. First determine the prorated cost of the real estate tax per month and day:

        • $3,600 ÷ 12 months = $300 per month

        • $300 ÷ 30 days = $10 per day

    - Next, multiply these figures by the accrued period and add the totals to determine the prorated real estate tax:

        • $300 × 8 months = $2,400

        • $10 × 17 days = $170

        • $2,400 + 170 = $2,570

    - Thus, the accrued real estate tax for 8 months and 17 days is $2,570. This amount represents the seller's accrued earned tax. It will be a credit to the buyer and a debit to the seller on the closing statement.

    Credits and Debts
    - Look at my screenshots for the notes on this section 
        • To compute this proration using the actual number of days in the accrued period, the following method is used:
                + The accrued period from January 1 to September 17 runs 260 days (January's 31 days plus February's 28 days and so on, plus the 17 days of September).
                    ~ $3,600 ÷ 365 days = $9.863 per day
                    ~ $9.863 × 260 days = $2,564.38

    - Although these examples show proration as of the date of settlement, the agreement of sale may indicate otherwise. For instance, if the buyer's possession date does not coincide with the settlement date, the parties could prorate according to the date of possession.
        • In Practice
                + On state licensing examinations, tax prorations are usually based on a 30-day month (360-day year) unless specified otherwise. This may differ from local custom regarding tax prorations. Many title insurance companies provide proration charts that detail tax factors for each day in the year. To determine a tax proration using one of these charts, multiply the factor given for the closing date by the annual real estate tax.

    Math Concepts
    - Computing Interim Interest
        • Interim interest is charged by a lender when a borrower obtains a new loan. This interest is called interim because it is for the interim period of time from the day of closing through the end of the closing month. Most real estate loan interest is paid in arrears, but interim interest is an example of interest paid in advance.
        • If closing on a loan on June 12, the borrower will owe interim interest for 19 days. The first full payment (PI) will be due August 1; this payment will include interest for July. If the closing is September 21, interim interest for 10 days will be paid at closing, and the first full payment will be due November 1 (paying interest for October).

    Prepaid Items 








