HO = Homeowner 

Purchasing a home can offer financial advantages to a buyer, provided the marketplace cooperates. 
    First, if the property's value increases, an eventual sale of the property might bring in more money than the owner's purchase price. 
    Second, as the total mortgage debt is reduced through monthly payments that include part of the principal owed, the owner's actual ownership interest in the property increases. 
        The difference between the market value of the property and the amount still owed on it is the homeowner's equity in the property. 
        The equity can be borrowed against in future or realized on a sale of the property. 
        A homeowner's mortgage payments thus help to build personal net worth. 
    Third financial advantage of home ownership may be the tax deductions total more than the amount of the applicable standard deduction and meet tax law stipulations. 
    Finally, part of the profit made on the sale of a principal residence is not taxed at all. 

       Tax Deductions 
            Homeowners may deduct from their gross income some or all of the mortgage interest paid up to a certain point. 
            For mortgages taken out after December 14, 2018, an individual may deduct interest off of debt up to $750,000. 
            Loans in existence prior to that date are not affected, as long as they are not over $1,000,000. 
            If a loan as the amount refinanced is not greater than the original loan amount. 
            Finally, between January 1, 2018, and December 31, 2025, the interest on a second mortgage is no longer tax deductible.
            State and local real estate taxes can be used as an itemized deduction up to a limit of $10,000. 
            Homeowners may also deduct certain loan origination fees and loan discount points. 

        Other tax benefits 
            When a married couple who file a joint tax return sell principal residence, up to $500,000 in profit (sales price minus purchase price) can be excluded from capital gains tax. 
            A taxpayer who files singly is entitled to a $250,000 exclusion. 
            The exclusion may be used repeatedly, as long as the homeowner has both owned and occupied the property as the principal residence for at least two of the past five years. 

            A first-time homebuyer may make a penalty-free withdrawal from a tax-deferred individual retirement account (IRA) for the down payment on a home, although the withdrawal is still subject to income tax in that year. 
            The limit on the withdrawal is $10,000 and the amount withdrawn must be spent entirely within 120 days on a down payment to avoid any penalty. 

            Other tax incentives, such as a tax credit for part of the purchase price, also are offered by the federal government from time to time to encourage homebuying. 
            In addition, many states have their own programs meant to encourage home ownership. 

            Real estate purchases purely for investment purposes (property that is not to be owner-occupied) offer their own tax and other incentives. 
            Because tax laws are subject to change, real estate professionals should rtecommend clients consult a competent tax professional for advice. 